After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
• write the common and IUPAC
names of aldehydes, ketones and
carboxylic acids;
• write the structures of the
compounds containing functional
groups namely carbonyl and
carboxyl groups;
• describe the important methods
of preparation and reactions of
these classes of compounds;
• correlate physical properties and
chemical reactions of aldehydes,
ketones and carboxylic acids,
with their structures;
• explain the mechanism of a few
selected reactions of aldehydes
and ketones;
• understand various factors
affecting the acidity of carboxylic
acids and their reactions;
• describe the uses of aldehydes,
ketones and carboxylic acids.
Objectives
Carbonyl compounds are of utmost importance to organic
chemistry. They are constituents of fabrics, flavourings, plastics
and drugs.
12
Unit Unit Unit Unit Unit
12
Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes, , , , , K K K K Ke e e e etones tones tones tones tones
and and and and and Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic
A A A A Acids cids cids cids cids
Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes, , , , , K K K K Ke e e e etones tones tones tones tones
and and and and and Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic
A A A A Acids cids cids cids cids
In the previous Unit, you have studied organic
compounds with functional groups containing carbon-
oxygen single bond. In this Unit, we will study about the
organic compounds containing carbon-oxygen double
bond (>C=O) called carbonyl group, which is one of the
most important functional groups in organic chemistry.
In aldehydes, the carbonyl group is bonded to a
carbon and hydrogen while in the ketones, it is bonded
to two carbon atoms. The carbonyl compounds in which
carbon of carbonyl group is bonded to carbon or
hydrogen and oxygen of hydroxyl moiety (-OH) are
known as carboxylic acids, while in compounds where
carbon is attached to carbon or hydrogen and nitrogen
of -NH 2 moiety or to halogens are called amides and
acyl halides respectively. Esters and anhydrides are
derivatives of carboxylic acids. The general formulas of
these classes of compounds are given below:
2020-21

358 Chemistry
Aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids are widespread in plants
and animal kingdom. They play an important role in biochemical
processes of life. They add fragrance and flavour to nature, for example,
vanillin (from vanilla beans), salicylaldehyde (from meadow sweet) and
cinnamaldehyde (from cinnamon) have very pleasant fragrances.
12.1.1
Nomenclature
I. Aldehydes and ketones
Aldehydes and ketones are the simplest and most important carbonyl
compounds.
There are two systems of nomenclature of aldehydes and ketones.
(a) Common names
Aldehydes and ketones are often called by their common names
instead of IUPAC names. The common names of most aldehydes are
derived from the common names of the corresponding carboxylic
acids [Section 12.6.1] by replacing the ending – ic of acid with aldehyde.
At the same time, the names reflect the Latin or Greek term for the
original source of the acid or aldehyde. The location of the substituent
in the carbon chain is indicated by Greek letters α , β , γ , δ , etc. The
α -carbon being the one directly linked to the aldehyde group, β -
carbon the next, and so on. For example
12.1 12.1 12.1 12.1 12.1 Nomenclature and Structure of Carbonyl Group Nomenclature and Structure of Carbonyl Group Nomenclature and Structure of Carbonyl Group Nomenclature and Structure of Carbonyl Group Nomenclature and Structure of Carbonyl Group
They are used in many food products and pharmaceuticals to add
flavours. Some of these families are manufactured for use as solvents
(i.e., acetone) and for preparing materials like adhesives, paints, resins,
perfumes, plastics, fabrics, etc.
2020-21

359 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
The common names of ketones are derived by naming two alkyl
or aryl groups bonded to the carbonyl group. The locations of
substituents are indicated by Greek letters, α α′ , β β′ and so on
beginning with the carbon atoms next to the carbonyl group,
indicated as αα′ . Some ketones have historical common names,
the simplest dimethyl ketone is called acetone. Alkyl phenyl
ketones are usually named by adding the name of acyl group as
prefix to the word phenone. For example
(b) IUPAC names
The IUPAC names of open chain aliphatic aldehydes and ketones
are derived from the names of the corresponding alkanes by
replacing the ending – e with – al and – one respectively. In case of
aldehydes the longest carbon chain is numbered starting from the
carbon of the aldehyde group while in case of ketones the
numbering begins from the end nearer to the carbonyl group. The
substituents are prefixed in alphabetical order along with numerals
indicating their positions in the carbon chain. The same applies to
cyclic ketones, where the carbonyl carbon is numbered one. When
the aldehyde group is attached to a ring, the suffix carbaldehyde
is added after the full name of the cycloalkane. The numbering of
the ring carbon atoms start from the carbon atom attached to the
aldehyde group. The name of the simplest aromatic aldehyde
carrying the aldehyde group on a benzene ring is
benzenecarbaldehyde. However, the common name benzaldehyde
is also accepted by IUPAC. Other aromatic aldehydes are hence
named as substituted benzaldehydes.
2020-21

360 Chemistry
Aldehydes
HCHO Formaldehyde Methanal
CH 3 CHO Acetaldehyde Ethanal
(CH 3 ) 2 CHCHO Isobutyraldehyde 2-Methylpropanal
γ - Methylcyclohexanecarbaldehyde 3-Methylcyclohexanecarbaldehyde
CH 3 CH(OCH 3 )CHO α -Methoxypropionaldehyde 2-Methoxypropanal
CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CHO Valeraldehyde Pentanal
CH 2 =CHCHO Acrolein Prop-2-enal
Phthaldehyde Benzene-1,2-dicarbaldehyde
m -Bromobenzaldehyde 3-Bromobenzaldehyde
Ketones
CH 3 COCH 2 CH 2 CH 3 Methyl n -propyl ketone Pentan-2-one
(CH 3 ) 2 CHCOCH(CH 3 ) 2 Diisopropyl ketone 2,4-Dimethylpentan-3-one
α -Methylcyclohexanone 2-Methylcyclohexanone
(CH 3 ) 2 C=CHCOCH 3 Mesityl oxide 4-Methylpent-3-en-2-one
Table 12.1: Common and IUPAC Names of Some Aldehydes and Ketones
Structure Common name IUPAC name
The common and IUPAC names of some aldehydes and ketones are
given in Table 12.1.
or
3-Bromobenzenecarbaldehyde
2020-21

361 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
The carbonyl carbon atom is sp
2
-hybridised and forms three sigma ( σ )
bonds. The fourth valence electron of carbon remains in its p -orbital
and forms a π -bond with oxygen by overlap with p -orbital of an oxygen.
In addition, the oxygen atom also has two non bonding electron pairs.
Thus, the carbonyl carbon and the three atoms attached to it lie in the
same plane and the π -electron cloud is above and below this plane. The
bond angles are approximately 120° as expected of a trigonal coplanar
structure (Figure 12.1).
12.1.2 Structure
of the
Carbonyl
Group
π
Fig.12.1 Orbital diagram for the formation of carbonyl group
The carbon-oxygen double bond is polarised due to higher
electronegativity of oxygen relative to carbon. Hence, the carbonyl
carbon is an electrophilic (Lewis acid), and carbonyl
oxygen, a nucleophilic (Lewis base) centre. Carbonyl
compounds have substantial dipole moments and are
polar than ethers. The high polarity of the carbonyl group
is explained on the basis of resonance involving a neutral
(A) and a dipolar (B) structures as shown.
Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions
12.1 Write the structures of the following compounds.
(i) α -Methoxypropionaldehyde (ii) 3-Hydroxybutanal
(iii) 2-Hydroxycyclopentane carbaldehyde (iv) 4-Oxopentanal
(v) Di-sec. butyl ketone (vi) 4-Fluoroacetophenone
Some important methods for the preparation of aldehydes
and ketones are as follows:
1. By oxidation of alcohols
Aldehydes and ketones are generally prepared by oxidation of primary
and secondary alcohols, respectively (Unit 11, Class XII).
2. By dehydrogenation of alcohols
This method is suitable for volatile alcohols and is of industrial
application. In this method alcohol vapours are passed over heavy
metal catalysts (Ag or Cu). Primary and secondary alcohols give
aldehydes and ketones, respectively (Unit 11, Class XII).
3. From hydrocarbons
( i ) By ozonolysis of alkenes: As we know, ozonolysis of alkenes
followed by reaction with zinc dust and water gives aldehydes,
12.2.1 Preparation
of
Aldehydes
and
Ketones
12.2 12.2 12.2 12.2 12.2 Preparation of Aldehydes Preparation of Aldehydes Preparation of Aldehydes Preparation of Aldehydes Preparation of Aldehydes
and Ketones and Ketones and Ketones and Ketones and Ketones
2020-21

362 Chemistry
ketones or a mixture of both depending on the substitution
pattern of the alkene (Unit 13, Class XI).
( ii ) By hydration of alkynes: Addition of water to ethyne in the
presence of H 2 SO 4 and HgSO 4 gives acetaldehyde. All other
alkynes give ketones in this reaction (Unit 13, Class XI).
1. From acyl chloride (acid chloride)
Acyl chloride (acid chloride) is hydrogenated over catalyst, palladium
on barium sulphate. This reaction is called Rosenmund reduction .
2. From nitriles and esters
Nitriles are reduced to corresponding imine with stannous chloride
in the presence of hydrochloric acid, which on hydrolysis give
corresponding aldehyde.
This reaction is called Stephen reaction .
Alternatively, nitriles are selectively reduced by
diisobutylaluminium hydride, (DIBAL-H) to imines followed by
hydrolysis to aldehydes:
12.2.2 Preparation
of
Aldehydes
Similarly, esters are also reduced to aldehydes with DIBAL-H.
3. From hydrocarbons
Aromatic aldehydes (benzaldehyde and its derivatives) are prepared
from aromatic hydrocarbons by the following methods:
(i) By oxidation of methylbenzene
Strong oxidising agents oxidise toluene and its derivatives to
benzoic acids. However, it is possible to stop the oxidation at
the aldehyde stage with suitable reagents that convert the methyl
group to an intermediate that is difficult to oxidise further. The
following methods are used for this purpose.
(a) Use of chromyl chloride (CrO 2 Cl 2 ): Chromyl chloride oxidises
methyl group to a chromium complex, which on hydrolysis
gives corresponding benzaldehyde.
2020-21

363 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
This reaction is called Etard reaction .
(b) Use of chromic oxide (CrO 3 ): Toluene or substituted toluene
is converted to benzylidene diacetate on treating with chromic
oxide in acetic anhydride. The benzylidene diacetate can be
hydrolysed to corresponding benzaldehyde with aqueous acid.
(iii) By Gatterman – Koch reaction
When benzene or its derivative is treated with carbon monoxide
and hydrogen chloride in the presence of anhydrous aluminium
chloride or cuprous chloride, it gives benzaldehyde or substituted
benzaldehyde.
(ii) By side chain chlorination followed by hydrolysis
Side chain chlorination of toluene gives benzal chloride, which
on hydrolysis gives benzaldehyde. This is a commercial method
of manufacture of benzaldehyde.
This reaction is known as Gatterman-Koch reaction.
1. From acyl chlorides
Treatment of acyl chlorides with dialkylcadmium, prepared by the
reaction of cadmium chloride with Grignard reagent, gives ketones.
12.2.3 Preparation
of Ketones
2020-21

364 Chemistry
2. From nitriles
Treating a nitrile with Grignard reagent followed by hydrolysis yields
a ketone.
Give names of the reagents to bring about the following
transformations:
(i) Hexan-1-ol to hexanal (ii) Cyclohexanol to cyclohexanone
(iii) p -Fluorotoluene to (iv) Ethanenitrile to ethanal
p -fluorobenzaldehyde
(v) Allyl alcohol to propenal (vi) But-2-ene to ethanal
(i) C
5
H
5
NH
+
CrO
3
Cl
-
(PCC) (ii) Anhydrous CrO
3
(iii) CrO
3 
in the presence (iv) (Diisobutyl)aluminium
of acetic anhydride/ hydride (DIBAL-H)
1. CrO
2
Cl
2 
2. HOH
(v) PCC (vi) O
3
/H
2
O-Zn dust
Example 12.1 Example 12.1 Example 12.1 Example 12.1 Example 12.1
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
(C 6 H CH ) Cd + 2 CH 5 2 2 3 COCl
CH 3
NO 2
1.CrO Cl 2 2
2.H 3 O
+
(iii) C C H 
Hg
2+
, H SO 2 4 H C 3 (iv)
Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question
12.2 Write the structures of products of the following reactions;
(i) (ii)
3. From benzene or substituted benzenes
When benzene or substituted benzene is treated with acid chloride in
the presence of anhydrous aluminium chloride, it affords the
corresponding ketone. This reaction is known as Friedel-Crafts
acylation reaction .
2020-21

365 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
The physical properties of aldehydes and ketones are described as
follows.
Methanal is a gas at room temperature. Ethanal is a volatile liquid.
Other aldehydes and ketones are liquid or solid at room temperature.
The boiling points of aldehydes and ketones are higher than
hydrocarbons and ethers of comparable molecular masses. It is due to
weak molecular association in aldehydes and ketones arising out of the
dipole-dipole interactions. Also, their boiling points are lower than those
of alcohols of similar molecular masses due to absence of intermolecular
hydrogen bonding. The following compounds of molecular masses 58
and 60 are ranked in order of increasing boiling points.
b.p.(K) Molecular Mass
n-Butane 273 58
Methoxyethane 281 60
Propanal 322 58
Acetone 329 58
Propan-1-ol 370 60
The lower members of aldehydes and ketones such as methanal,
ethanal and propanone are miscible with water in all proportions,
because they form hydrogen bond with water.
However, the solubility of aldehydes and ketones decreases rapidly
on increasing the length of alkyl chain. All aldehydes and ketones are
fairly soluble in organic solvents like benzene, ether, methanol,
chloroform, etc. The lower aldehydes have sharp pungent odours. As
the size of the molecule increases, the odour becomes less pungent
and more fragrant. In fact, many naturally occurring aldehydes and
ketones are used in the blending of perfumes and flavouring agents.
12.3 Physical 12.3 Physical 12.3 Physical 12.3 Physical 12.3 Physical
Properties Properties Properties Properties Properties
Arrange the following compounds in the increasing order of their
boiling points:
CH
3
CH
2
CH
2
CHO, CH
3
CH
2
CH
2
CH
2
OH, H
5
C
2
-O-C
2
H
5
, CH
3
CH
2
CH
2
CH
3
The molecular masses of these compounds are in the range of 72 to
74. Since only butan-1-ol molecules are associated due to extensive
intermolecular hydrogen bonding, therefore, the boiling point of
butan-1-ol would be the highest. Butanal is more polar than
ethoxyethane. Therefore, the intermolecular dipole-dipole attraction
is stronger in the former. n -Pentane molecules have only weak van
der Waals forces . Hence increasing order of boiling points of the
given compounds is as follows:
CH
3
CH
2
CH
2
CH
3 
< H
5
C
2
-O-C
2
H
5 
< CH
3
CH
2
CH
2
CHO < CH
3
CH
2
CH
2
CH
2
OH
Example 12.2 Example 12.2 Example 12.2 Example 12.2 Example 12.2
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
2020-21

366 Chemistry
Since aldehydes and ketones both possess the carbonyl functional
group, they undergo similar chemical reactions.
1. Nucleophilic addition reactions
Contrary to electrophilic addition reactions observed in alkenes (refer
Unit 13, Class XI), the aldehydes and ketones undergo nucleophilic
addition reactions.
(i) Mechanism of nucleophilic addition reactions
A nucleophile attacks the electrophilic carbon atom of the polar
carbonyl group from a direction approximately perpendicular to
the plane of sp
2 
hybridised orbitals of carbonyl carbon (Fig. 12.2).
The hybridisation of carbon changes from sp
2 
to sp
3 
in this process,
and a tetrahedral alkoxide intermediate is produced. This
intermediate captures a
proton from the reaction
medium to give the
electrically neutral product.
The net result is addition of
Nu
– 
and H
+ 
across the
carbon oxygen double bond
as shown in Fig. 12.2.
Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question
12.3 Arrange the following compounds in increasing order of
their boiling points.
CH
3
CHO, CH
3
CH
2
OH, CH
3
OCH
3
, CH
3
CH
2
CH
3
Fig.12.2: Nucleophilic attack on carbonyl carbon
Would you expect benzaldehyde to be more reactive or less reactive in
nucleophilic addition reactions than propanal? Explain your answer.
The carbon atom of the carbonyl group of benzaldehyde is less
electrophilic than carbon atom of the carbonyl group present in
propanal. The polarity of the carbonyl
group is reduced in benzaldehyde due
to resonance as shown below and
hence it is less reactive than propanal.
Example 12.3 Example 12.3 Example 12.3 Example 12.3 Example 12.3
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
(ii) Reactivity
Aldehydes are generally more reactive than ketones in
nucleophilic addition reactions due to steric and electronic
reasons. Sterically, the presence of two relatively large
substituents in ketones hinders the approach of nucleophile to
carbonyl carbon than in aldehydes having only one such
substituent. Electronically, aldehydes are more reactive than
ketones because two alkyl groups reduce the electrophilicity of
the carbonyl carbon more effectively than in former.
12.4 Chemical 12.4 Chemical 12.4 Chemical 12.4 Chemical 12.4 Chemical
Reactions Reactions Reactions Reactions Reactions
2020-21

367 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
(iii) Some important examples of nucleophilic addition and
nucleophilic addition-elimination reactions:
(a) Addition of hydrogen cyanide (HCN) : Aldehydes
and ketones react with hydrogen cyanide (HCN)
to yield cyanohydrins. This reaction occurs very
slowly with pure HCN. Therefore, it is catalysed
by a base and the generated cyanide ion (CN
-
)
being a stronger nucleophile readily adds to
carbonyl compounds to yield corresponding
cyanohydrin.
Cyanohydrins are useful synthetic
intermediates.
(b) Addition of sodium hydrogensulphite: Sodium
hydrogensulphite adds to aldehydes and
ketones to form the addition products.
The position of
the equilibrium
lies largely to
the right hand
side for most
aldehydes and to
the left for most
ketones due to steric reasons. The hydrogensulphite addition
compound is water soluble and can be converted back to the
original carbonyl compound by treating it with dilute mineral
acid or alkali. Therefore, these are useful for separation and
purification of aldehydes.
(c) Addition of Grignard reagents: (refer Unit 11, Class XII).
(d) Addition of alcohols: Aldehydes react with one equivalent of
monohydric alcohol in the presence of dry hydrogen chloride
to yield alkoxyalcohol intermediate, known as hemiacetals,
which further react with one more molecule of alcohol to
give a gem -dialkoxy
compound known as
acetal as shown in the
reaction.
Ketones react with
ethylene glycol under
similar conditions to form
cyclic products known as
ethylene glycol ketals.
Dry hydrogen chloride
protonates the oxygen of
the carbonyl compounds
and therefore, increases
the electrophilicity of the
carbonyl carbon facilitating
2020-21

368 Chemistry
the nucleophilic attack of ethylene glycol. Acetals and ketals
are hydrolysed with aqueous mineral acids to yield
corresponding aldehydes and ketones respectively.
(e) Addition of ammonia and its derivatives : Nucleophiles, such
as ammonia and its derivatives H
2
N-Z add to the carbonyl
group of aldehydes and ketones. The reaction is reversible
and catalysed by acid.
The equilibrium
favours the product
formation due to rapid
dehydration of the
intermediate to form
>C=N-Z.
Z = Alkyl, aryl, OH, NH 2 , C 6 H 5 NH, NHCONH 2 , etc.
Table 12.2: Some N-Substituted Derivatives of Aldehydes and Ketones (>C=N-Z)
-H Ammonia Imine
-R Amine
—OH Hydroxylamine Oxime
—NH 2 Hydrazine Hydrazone
Phenylhydrazine Phenylhydrazone
Z Reagent name Carbonyl derivative Product name
Substituted imine
(Schiff’s base)
* 2,4-DNP-derivatives are yellow, orange or red solids, useful for characterisation of aldehydes and ketones.
2,4-Dinitrophenyl- 2,4 Dinitrophenyl-
Semicarbazide Semicarbazone
2. Reduction
(i) Reduction to alcohols: Aldehydes and ketones are reduced to
primary and secondary alcohols respectively by sodium
borohydride (NaBH 4 ) or lithium aluminium hydride (LiAlH 4 ) as
well as by catalytic hydrogenation (Unit 11, Class XII).
( ii ) Reduction to hydrocarbons: The carbonyl group of aldehydes
and ketones is reduced to CH 2 group on treatment with zinc-
amalgam and concentrated hydrochloric acid [ Clemmensen
hydrazone hydrazine
2020-21

369 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
reduction ] or with hydrazine followed by heating with sodium
or potassium hydroxide in high boiling solvent such as ethylene
glycol ( Wolff-Kishner reduction ).
3. Oxidation
Aldehydes differ from ketones in their oxidation reactions. Aldehydes
are easily oxidised to carboxylic acids on treatment with common
oxidising agents like nitric acid, potassium permanganate, potassium
dichromate, etc. Even mild oxidising agents, mainly Tollens’ reagent
and Fehlings’ reagent also oxidise aldehydes.
Ketones are generally oxidised under vigorous conditions, i.e.,
strong oxidising agents and at elevated temperatures. Their oxidation
involves carbon-carbon bond cleavage to afford a mixture of carboxylic
acids having lesser number of carbon atoms than the parent ketone.
The mild oxidising agents given below are used to distinguish
aldehydes from ketones:
(i) Tollens’ test: On warming an aldehyde with freshly prepared
ammoniacal silver nitrate solution (Tollens’ reagent), a bright
silver mirror is produced due to the formation of silver metal.
The aldehydes are oxidised to corresponding carboxylate anion.
The reaction occurs in alkaline medium.
(ii) Fehling’s test: Fehling reagent comprises of two solutions,
Fehling solution A and Fehling solution B. Fehling solution A is
aqueous copper sulphate and Fehling solution B is alkaline
sodium potassium tartarate (Rochelle salt). These two solutions
are mixed in equal amounts before test. On heating an aldehyde
with Fehling’s reagent, a reddish brown precipitate is obtained.
Aldehydes are oxidised to corresponding carboxylate anion.
Aromatic aldehydes do not respond to this test.
Bernhard Tollens
(1841-1918) was a
Professor of Chemistry
at the University of
Gottingen, Germany.
2020-21

370 Chemistry
Example 12.4 Example 12.4 Example 12.4 Example 12.4 Example 12.4 An organic compound (A) with molecular formula C
8
H
8
O forms an
orange-red precipitate with 2,4-DNP reagent and gives yellow
precipitate on heating with iodine in the presence of sodium
hydroxide. It neither reduces Tollens’ or Fehlings’ reagent, nor does
it decolourise bromine water or Baeyer’s reagent. On drastic oxidation
with chromic acid, it gives a carboxylic acid (B) having molecular
formula C
7
H
6
O
2
. Identify the compounds (A) and (B) and explain the
reactions involved.
(A) forms 2,4-DNP derivative. Therefore, it is an aldehyde or a ketone.
Since it does not reduce Tollens’ or Fehling reagent, (A) must be a ketone.
(A) responds to iodoform test. Therefore, it should be a methyl ketone.
The molecular formula of (A) indicates high degree of unsaturation, yet
it does not decolourise bromine water or Baeyer’s reagent. This indicates
the presence of unsaturation due to an aromatic ring.
Compound (B), being an oxidation product of a ketone should be a
carboxylic acid. The molecular formula of (B) indicates that it should
be benzoic acid and compound (A) should, therefore, be a
monosubstituted aromatic methyl ketone. The molecular formula of
(A) indicates that it should be phenyl methyl ketone (acetophenone).
Reactions are as follows:
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
(iii) Oxidation of methyl ketones by haloform reaction :
Aldehydes and ketones having at least one methyl group
linked to the carbonyl carbon atom (methyl ketones)
are oxidised by sodium hypohalite to sodium salts of
corresponding carboxylic
acids having one carbon
atom less than that of
carbonyl compound. The
methyl group is
converted to haloform.
This oxidation does not
affect a carbon-carbon
double bond, if present
in the molecule.
Iodoform reaction with sodium hypoiodite is also used for detection
of CH 3 CO group or CH 3 CH(OH) group which produces CH 3 CO group
on oxidation.
2020-21

371 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
4. Reactions due to a-hydrogen
Acidity of α α α α α -hydrogens of aldehydes and ketones: The aldehydes
and ketones undergo a number of reactions due to the acidic nature
of α -hydrogen.
The acidity of α -hydrogen atoms of carbonyl compounds is due
to the strong electron withdrawing effect of the carbonyl group and
resonance stabilisation of the conjugate base.
(i) Aldol condensation: Aldehydes and ketones having at least one
α -hydrogen undergo a reaction in the presence of dilute alkali
as catalyst to form β -hydroxy aldehydes (aldol) or β -hydroxy
ketones (ketol), respectively. This is known as Aldol reaction.
The name aldol is derived from the names of the two
functional groups, aldehyde and alcohol, present in the products.
The aldol and ketol readily lose water to give α , β -unsaturated
carbonyl compounds which are aldol condensation products
and the reaction is called Aldol condensation. Though ketones
give ketols (compounds containing a keto and alcohol groups),
the general name aldol condensation still applies to the reactions
of ketones due to their similarity with aldehydes.
2020-21

372 Chemistry
( ii ) Cross aldol condensation: When aldol condensation is carried
out between two different aldehydes and / or ketones, it is called
cross aldol condensation . If both of them contain α -hydrogen
atoms, it gives a mixture of four products. This is illustrated
below by aldol reaction of a mixture of ethanal and propanal.
Ketones can also be used as one component in the cross aldol
reactions.
5. Other reactions
( i ) Cannizzaro reaction: Aldehydes which do not have an
α -hydrogen atom, undergo self oxidation and reduction
(disproportionation) reaction on heating with concentrated alkali.
In this reaction, one molecule of the aldehyde is reduced to
alcohol while another is oxidised to carboxylic acid salt.
∆
∆
2020-21

373 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
( ii ) Electrophilic substitution reaction : Aromatic aldehydes and ketones
undergo electrophilic substitution at the ring in which the carbonyl
group acts as a deactivating and meta -directing group.
Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions
12.4 Arrange the following compounds in increasing order of their reactivity in
nucleophilic addition reactions.
(i) Ethanal, Propanal, Propanone, Butanone.
(ii) Benzaldehyde, p -Tolualdehyde, p -Nitrobenzaldehyde, Acetophenone.
Hint: Consider steric effect and electronic effect.
12.5 Predict the products of the following reactions :
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
In chemical industry aldehydes and ketones are used as solvents,
starting materials and reagents for the synthesis of other products.
Formaldehyde is well known as formalin (40%) solution used to preserve
biological specimens and to prepare bakelite (a phenol-formaldehyde
resin), urea-formaldehyde glues and other polymeric products.
Acetaldehyde is used primarily as a starting material in the manufacture
of acetic acid, ethyl acetate, vinyl acetate, polymers and drugs.
Benzaldehyde is used in perfumery and in dye industries. Acetone and
ethyl methyl ketone are common industrial solvents. Many aldehydes
and ketones, e.g., butyraldehyde, vanillin, acetophenone, camphor, etc.
are well known for their odours and flavours.
12.5 12.5 12.5 12.5 12.5 Uses of Uses of Uses of Uses of Uses of
Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes Aldehydes
and Ketones and Ketones and Ketones and Ketones and Ketones
2020-21

374 Chemistry
Structure Common name IUPAC name
HCOOH Formic acid Methanoic acid
CH
3
COOH Acetic acid Ethanoic acid
CH
3
CH
2
COOH Propionic acid Propanoic acid
CH
3
CH
2
CH
2
COOH Butyric acid Butanoic acid
(CH
3
)
2
CHCOOH Isobutyric acid 2-Methylpropanoic acid
HOOC-COOH Oxalic acid Ethanedioic acid
HOOC -CH
2
-COOH Malonic acid Propanedioic acid
HOOC -(CH
2
)
2
-COOH Succinic acid Butanedioic acid
HOOC -(CH
2
)
3
-COOH Glutaric acid Pentanedioic acid
HOOC -(CH
2
)
4
-COOH Adipic acid Hexanedioic acid
HOOC -CH
2
-CH(COOH)-CH
2
-COOH Tricarballylic acid Propane-1, 2, 3-
or carballylic acid tricarboxylic acid
Carboxylic Acids
Carbon compounds containing a carboxyl functional group, –COOH are
called carboxylic acids. The carboxyl group, consists of a carbonyl group
attached to a hydroxyl group, hence its name carboxyl . Carboxylic acids
may be aliphatic (RCOOH) or aromatic (ArCOOH) depending on the group,
alkyl or aryl, attached to carboxylic carbon. Large number of carboxylic
acids are found in nature. Some higher members of aliphatic carboxylic
acids (C 12 – C 18 ) known as fatty acids, occur in natural fats as esters of
glycerol. Carboxylic acids serve as starting material for several other
important organic compounds such as anhydrides, esters, acid chlorides,
amides, etc.
Since carboxylic acids are amongst the earliest organic compounds to
be isolated from nature, a large number of them are known by their
common names. The common names end with the suffix – ic acid and
have been derived from Latin or Greek names of their natural sources.
For example, formic acid (HCOOH) was first obtained from red ants
(Latin: formica means ant), acetic acid (CH 3 COOH) from vinegar (Latin:
acetum , means vinegar), butyric acid (CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 COOH) from rancid
butter (Latin: butyrum, means butter).
In the IUPAC system, aliphatic carboxylic acids are named by
replacing the ending – e in the name of the corresponding alkane with –
oic acid . In numbering the carbon chain, the carboxylic carbon is
numbered one. For naming compounds containing more than one
carboxyl group, the alkyl chain leaving carboxyl groups is numbered
and the number of carboxyl groups is indicated by adding the
multiplicative prefix, dicarboxylic acid , tricarboxylic acid, etc. to the name
of parent alkyl chain. The position of –COOH groups are indicated by the
arabic numeral before the multiplicative prefix. Some of the carboxylic
acids along with their common and IUPAC names are listed in Table 12.3.
12.6 12.6 12.6 12.6 12.6 Nomenclature and Structure of Carboxyl Group Nomenclature and Structure of Carboxyl Group Nomenclature and Structure of Carboxyl Group Nomenclature and Structure of Carboxyl Group Nomenclature and Structure of Carboxyl Group
Table 12.3 Names and Structures of Some Carboxylic Acids
12.6.1
Nomenclature
2020-21

375 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
Benzoic acid Benzenecarboxylic acid
(Benzoic acid)
Phenylacetic acid 2-Phenylethanoic acid
Phthalic acid Benzene-1, 2-dicarboxylic
acid
In carboxylic acids, the bonds to the carboxyl carbon lie in one plane
and are separated by about 120°. The carboxylic carbon is less
electrophilic than carbonyl carbon because of the possible resonance
structure shown below:
12.6.2 Structure
of Carboxyl
Group
Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question
12.6 Give the IUPAC names of the following compounds:
(i) Ph CH
2
CH
2
COOH (ii) (CH
3
)
2
C=CHCOOH
(iii) COOH
CH 3
(iv)
Some important methods of preparation of carboxylic acids are as follows.
1. From primary alcohols and aldehydes
Primary alcohols are readily oxidised to carboxylic acids with common
oxidising agents such as potassium permanganate (KMnO 4 ) in
neutral, acidic or alkaline media or by potassium dichromate (K 2 Cr 2 O 7 )
and chromium trioxide (CrO 3 ) in acidic media (Jones reagent).
12.7 12.7 12.7 12.7 12.7 Methods of Methods of Methods of Methods of Methods of
Preparation Preparation Preparation Preparation Preparation
of Carboxylic of Carboxylic of Carboxylic of Carboxylic of Carboxylic
Acids Acids Acids Acids Acids
+
Jones reagent
2020-21

376 Chemistry
Carboxylic acids are also prepared from aldehydes by the use of
mild oxidising agents (Section 12.4).
2. From alkylbenzenes
Aromatic carboxylic acids can be prepared by vigorous oxidation of
alkyl benzenes with chromic acid or acidic or alkaline potassium
permanganate. The entire side chain is oxidised to the carboxyl group
irrespective of length of the side chain. Primary and secondary alkyl
groups are oxidised in this manner while tertiary group is not affected.
Suitably substituted alkenes are also oxidised to carboxylic acids
with these oxidising reagents (refer Unit 13, Class XI).
3. From nitriles and amides
Nitriles are hydrolysed to amides and then to acids in the presence of
H
+ 
or OH
−
as catalyst. Mild reaction conditions are used to stop the
reaction at the amide stage.
4. From Grignard reagents
Grignard reagents react with carbon dioxide (dry ice) to form salts of
carboxylic acids which in turn give corresponding carboxylic acids
after acidification with mineral acid.
As we know, the Grignard reagents and nitriles can be prepared
from alkyl halides (refer Unit 10, Class XII). The above methods
2020-21

377 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
(3 and 4) are useful for converting alkyl halides into corresponding
carboxylic acids having one carbon atom more than that present in
alkyl halides (ascending the series).
5. From acyl halides and anhydrides
Acid chlorides when hydrolysed with water give carboxylic acids or more
readily hydrolysed with aqueous base to give carboxylate ions which on
acidification provide corresponding carboxylic acids. Anhydrides on the
other hand are hydrolysed to corresponding acid(s) with water.
6. From esters
Acidic hydrolysis of esters gives directly carboxylic acids while basic
hydrolysis gives carboxylates, which on acidification give
corresponding carboxylic acids.
Example 12.5 Example 12.5 Example 12.5 Example 12.5 Example 12.5 Write chemical reactions to affect the following transformations:
(i) Butan-1-ol to butanoic acid
(ii) Benzyl alcohol to phenylethanoic acid
(iii) 3-Nitrobromobenzene to 3-nitrobenzoic acid
(iv) 4-Methylacetophenone to benzene-1,4-dicarboxylic acid
(v) Cyclohexene to hexane-1,6-dioic acid
(vi) Butanal to butanoic acid.
2020-21

378 Chemistry
Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question
12.7 Show how each of the following compounds can be
converted to benzoic acid.
(i) Ethylbenzene (ii) Acetophenone
(iii) Bromobenzene (iv) Phenylethene (Styrene)
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution (i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
2020-21

379 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
Aliphatic carboxylic acids upto nine carbon atoms are colourless
liquids at room temperature with unpleasant odours. The higher
acids are wax like solids and are practically odourless due
to their low volatility. Carboxylic acids are higher boiling
liquids than aldehydes, ketones and even alcohols of
comparable molecular masses. This is due to more extensive
association of carboxylic acid molecules through
intermolecular hydrogen bonding. The hydrogen bonds are
not broken completely even in the vapour phase. In fact,
most carboxylic acids exist as dimer in the vapour phase
or in the aprotic solvents.
Simple aliphatic carboxylic acids having upto four
carbon atoms are miscible in water due to the formation
of hydrogen bonds with water. The solubility decreases
with increasing number of carbon atoms. Higher
carboxylic acids are practically insoluble in water due to
the increased hydrophobic interaction of hydrocarbon
part. Benzoic acid, the simplest aromatic carboxylic acid
is nearly insoluble in cold water. Carboxylic acids are
also soluble in less polar organic solvents like benzene,
ether, alcohol, chloroform, etc.
The reaction of carboxylic acids are classified as follows:
Acidity
Reactions with metals and alkalies
The carboxylic acids like alcohols evolve hydrogen with electropositive
metals and form salts with alkalies similar to phenols. However, unlike
phenols they react with weaker bases such as carbonates and
hydrogencarbonates to evolve carbon dioxide. This reaction is used to
detect the presence of carboxyl group in an organic compound.
Carboxylic acids dissociate in water to give resonance stabilised
carboxylate anions and hydronium ion.
12.9.1 Reactions
Involving
Cleavage of
O–H Bond
12.8 12.8 12.8 12.8 12.8 Physical Physical Physical Physical Physical
Properties Properties Properties Properties Properties
12.9 12.9 12.9 12.9 12.9 Chemical Reactions Chemical Reactions Chemical Reactions Chemical Reactions Chemical Reactions
In vapour state or in
aprotic solvent
Hydrogen bonding of
RCOOH with H
2
O
2020-21

380 Chemistry
where K eq , is equilibrium constant and K a is the acid dissociation
constant.
For convenience, the strength of an acid is generally indicated by
its p K a value rather than its K a value.
p K
a 
= – log K
a
The p K a of hydrochloric acid is –7.0, where as p K a of trifluoroacetic
acid (the strongest carboxylic acid), benzoic acid and acetic acid are
0.23, 4.19 and 4.76, respectively.
Smaller the p K a , the stronger the acid ( the better it is as a proton
donor). Strong acids have p K a values < 1, the acids with p K a values
between 1 and 5 are considered to be moderately strong acids, weak
acids have p K a values between 5 and 15, and extremely weak acids
have p K a values >15.
Carboxylic acids are weaker than mineral acids, but they are stronger
acids than alcohols and many simple phenols (p K a is ~16 for ethanol
and 10 for phenol). In fact, carboxylic acids are amongst the most acidic
organic compounds you have studied so far. You already know why
phenols are more acidic than alcohols. The higher acidity of carboxylic
acids as compared to phenols can be understood similarly. The conjugate
base of carboxylic acid, a carboxylate ion, is stabilised by two equivalent
resonance structures in which the negative charge is at the more
electronegative oxygen atom. The conjugate base of phenol, a phenoxide
ion, has non-equivalent resonance structures in which the negative charge
is at the less electronegative carbon atom. Therefore, resonance in
phenoxide ion is not as important as it is in carboxylate ion. Further, the
negative charge is delocalised over two electronegative oxygen atoms in
carboxylate ion whereas it is less effectively delocalised over one oxygen
atom and less electronegative carbon atoms in phenoxide ion (Unit 11,
Class XII). Thus, the carboxylate ion is more stabilised than phenoxide
ion, so carboxylic acids are more acidic than phenols.
Effect of substituents on the acidity of carboxylic acids:
Substituents may affect the stability of the conjugate base and thus,
also affect the acidity of the carboxylic acids. Electron withdrawing
groups increase the acidity of carboxylic acids by stabilising the
conjugate base through delocalisation of the negative charge by
inductive and/or resonance effects. Conversely, electron donating groups
decrease the acidity by destabilising the conjugate base.
Electron withdrawing group (EWG)
stabilises the carboxylate anion
and strengthens the acid
Electron donating group (EDG)
destabilises the carboxylate
anion and weakens the acid
For the above reaction:
2020-21

381 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
The effect of the following groups in increasing acidity order is
Ph < I < Br < Cl < F < CN < NO 2 < CF 3
Thus, the following acids are arranged in order of increasing acidity
(based on p K a values):
CF 3 COOH > CCl 3 COOH > CHCl 2 COOH > NO 2 CH 2 COOH > NC-CH 2 COOH >
FCH 2 COOH > ClCH 2 COOH > BrCH 2 COOH > HCOOH > ClCH 2 CH 2 COOH >
(continue)
C
6
H
5
COOH > C
6
H
5
CH
2
COOH > CH
3
COOH > CH
3
CH
2
COOH
(continue )
Direct attachment of groups such as phenyl or vinyl to the carboxylic
acid, increases the acidity of corresponding carboxylic acid, contrary to
the decrease expected due to resonance effect shown below:
This is because of greater electronegativity of sp
2 
hybridised carbon
to which carboxyl carbon is attached. The presence of electron
withdrawing group on the phenyl of aromatic carboxylic acid increases
their acidity while electron donating groups decrease their acidity.
COOH
OCH
3
COOH COOH
NO 2
4-Methoxy
benzoic acid
(p = 4.46) K a
Benzoic acid
(p = 4.19) K a
4-Nitrobenzoic
acid
(p = 3.41) K a
1. Formation of anhydride
Carboxylic acids on heating with mineral acids such as H 2 SO 4 or with
P 2 O 5 give corresponding anhydride.
2. Esterification
Carboxylic acids are esterified with alcohols or phenols in the presence
of a mineral acid such as concentrated H 2 SO 4 or HCl gas as a catalyst.
12.9.2 Reactions
Involving
Cleavage of
C–OH Bond
2020-21

382 Chemistry
Mechanism of esterification of carboxylic acids: The esterification of carboxylic
acids with alcohols is a kind of nucleophilic acyl substitution. Protonation of the
carbonyl oxygen activates the carbonyl group towards nucleophilic addition of the
alcohol. Proton transfer in the tetrahedral intermediate converts the hydroxyl group
into –
+
OH 2 group, which, being a better leaving group, is eliminated as neutral water
molecule. The protonated ester so formed finally loses a proton to give the ester.
3. Reactions with PCl 5 , PCl 3 and SOCl 2
The hydroxyl group of carboxylic acids, behaves like that of alcohols
and is easily replaced by chlorine atom on treating with PCl 5 , PCl 3 or
SOCl 2 . Thionyl chloride (SOCl 2 ) is preferred because the other two
products are gaseous and escape the reaction mixture making the
purification of the products easier.
4. Reaction with ammonia
Carboxylic acids react with ammonia to give ammonium salt which
on further heating at high temperature give amides. For example:
2020-21

383 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
12.9.3 Reactions
Involving
–COOH
Group
1. Reduction
Carboxylic acids are reduced to primary alcohols by lithium
aluminium hydride or better with diborane. Diborane does not easily
reduce functional groups such as ester, nitro, halo, etc. Sodium
borohydride does not reduce the carboxyl group.
2. Decarboxylation
Carboxylic acids lose carbon dioxide to form hydrocarbons when their
sodium salts are heated with sodalime (NaOH and CaO in the ratio of
3 : 1). The reaction is known as decarboxylation.
Alkali metal salts of carboxylic acids also undergo decarboxylation
on electrolysis of their aqueous solutions and form hydrocarbons having
twice the number of carbon atoms present in the alkyl group of the acid.
The reaction is known as Kolbe electrolysis (Unit 13, Class XI) .
1. Halogenation
Carboxylic acids having an α -hydrogen are halogenated at the
α -position on treatment with chlorine or bromine in the presence of
small amount of red phosphorus to give α -halocarboxylic acids. The
reaction is known as Hell-Volhard-Zelinsky reaction.
12.9.4
Substitution
Reactions in the
Hydrocarbon Part
2020-21

384 Chemistry
12.10 12.10 12.10 12.10 12.10 Uses of Uses of Uses of Uses of Uses of
Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic Carboxylic
Acids Acids Acids Acids Acids
S u m m a r y S u m m a r y S u m m a r y S u m m a r y S u m m a r y
Aldehydes , ketones and carboxylic acids are some of the important classes of
organic compounds containing carbonyl group. These are highly polar molecules.
Therefore, they boil at higher temperatures than the hydrocarbons and weakly
polar compounds such as ethers of comparable molecular masses. The lower
members are more soluble in water because they form hydrogen bonds with water.
The higher members, because of large size of hydrophobic chain of carbon atoms,
are insoluble in water but soluble in common organic solvents. Aldehydes are
prepared by dehydrogenation or controlled oxidation of primary alcohols and
controlled or selective reduction of acyl halides. Aromatic aldehydes may also be
prepared by oxidation of (i) methylbenzene with chromyl chloride or CrO 3 in the
presence of acetic anhydride, (ii) formylation of arenes with carbon monoxide and
hydrochloric acid in the presence of anhydrous aluminium chloride, and (iii) cuprous
chloride or by hydrolysis of benzal chloride. Ketones are prepared by oxidation of
secondary alcohols and hydration of alkynes. Ketones are also prepared by reaction
of acyl chloride with dialkylcadmium. A good method for the preparation of aromatic
ketones is the Friedel-Crafts acylation of aromatic hydrocarbons with acyl chlorides
or anhydrides. Both aldehydes and ketones can be prepared by ozonolysis of alkenes.
Aldehydes and ketones undergo nucleophilic addition reactions onto the carbonyl
group with a number of nucleophiles such as, HCN, NaHSO 3 , alcohols (or diols),
2. Ring substitution
Aromatic carboxylic acids undergo electrophilic substitution reactions
in which the carboxyl group acts as a deactivating and meta-directing
group. They however, do not undergo Friedel-Crafts reaction
(because the carboxyl group is deactivating and the catalyst
aluminium chloride (Lewis acid) gets bonded to the carboxyl group).
Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question
12.8 Which acid of each pair shown here would you expect to be stronger?
(i) CH
3
CO
2
H or CH
2
FCO
2
H (ii) CH
2
FCO
2
H or CH
2
ClCO
2
H
(iii) CH
2
FCH
2
CH
2
CO
2
H or CH
3
CHFCH
2
CO
2
H
Methanoic acid is used in rubber, textile, dyeing, leather and electroplating
industries. Ethanoic acid is used as solvent and as vinegar in food industry.
Hexanedioic acid is used in the manufacture of nylon-6, 6. Esters of benzoic
acid are used in perfumery. Sodium benzoate is used as a food preservative.
Higher fatty acids are used for the manufacture of soaps and detergents.
(iv)
2020-21

385 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
ammonia derivatives, and Grignard reagents . The α -hydrogens in aldehydes and
ketones are acidic. Therefore, aldehydes and ketones having at least one α -hydrogen,
undergo A ldol condensation in the presence of a base to give α -hydroxyaldehydes
(aldol) and α -hydroxyketones(ketol), respectively. Aldehydes having no α -hydrogen
undergo Cannizzaro reaction in the presence of concentrated alkali. Aldehydes
and ketones are reduced to alcohols with NaBH 4 , LiAlH 4 , or by catalytic hydrogenation.
The carbonyl group of aldehydes and ketones can be reduced to a methylene group
by Clemmensen reduction or Wolff-Kishner reduction . Aldehydes are easily
oxidised to carboxylic acids by mild oxidising reagents such as Tollens’ reagent and
Fehling’s reagent . These oxidation reactions are used to distinguish aldehydes from
ketones. Carboxylic acids are prepared by the oxidation of primary alcohols, aldehydes
and alkenes by hydrolysis of nitriles, and by treatment of Grignard reagents with
carbon dioxide. Aromatic carboxylic acids are also prepared by side-chain oxidation
of alkylbenzenes. Carboxylic acids are considerably more acidic than alcohols and
most of simple phenols. Carboxylic acids are reduced to primary alcohols with LiAlH 4 ,
or better with diborane in ether solution and also undergo α -halogenation with Cl 2
and Br 2 in the presence of red phosphorus ( Hell-Volhard Zelinsky reaction ).
Methanal, ethanal, propanone, benzaldehyde, formic acid, acetic acid and benzoic
acid are highly useful compounds in industry.
Exercises
12.1 What is meant by the following terms ? Give an example of the reaction in
each case.
(i) Cyanohydrin (ii) Acetal (iii) Semicarbazone
(iv) Aldol (v) Hemiacetal (vi) Oxime
(vii) Ketal (vii) Imine (ix) 2,4-DNP-derivative
(x) Schiff’s base
12.2 Name the following compounds according to IUPAC system of nomenclature:
(i) CH 3 CH(CH 3 )CH 2 CH 2 CHO (ii) CH 3 CH 2 COCH(C 2 H 5 )CH 2 CH 2 Cl
(iii) CH 3 CH=CHCHO (iv) CH 3 COCH 2 COCH 3
(v) CH 3 CH(CH 3 )CH 2 C(CH 3 ) 2 COCH 3 (vi) (CH 3 ) 3 CCH 2 COOH
(vii) OHCC 6 H 4 CHO- p
12.3 Draw the structures of the following compounds.
(i) 3-Methylbutanal (ii) p -Nitropropiophenone
(iii) p -Methylbenzaldehyde (iv) 4-Methylpent-3-en-2-one
(v) 4-Chloropentan-2-one (vi) 3-Bromo-4-phenylpentanoic acid
(vii ) p,p’ -Dihydroxybenzophenone (viii) Hex-2-en-4-ynoic acid
12.4 Write the IUPAC names of the following ketones and aldehydes. Wherever
possible, give also common names.
(i) CH 3 CO(CH 2 ) 4 CH 3 (ii) CH 3 CH 2 CHBrCH 2 CH(CH 3 )CHO
(iii) CH 3 (CH 2 ) 5 CHO (iv) Ph-CH=CH-CHO
(v)
CHO
(vi) PhCOPh
12.5 Draw structures of the following derivatives.
(i) The 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazone of benzaldehyde
(ii) Cyclopropanone oxime
(iii) Acetaldehydedimethylacetal
(iv) The semicarbazone of cyclobutanone
(v) The ethylene ketal of hexan-3-one
(vi) The methyl hemiacetal of formaldehyde
2020-21

386 Chemistry
12.6 Predict the products formed when cyclohexanecarbaldehyde reacts with
following reagents.
(i) PhMgBr and then H 3 O
+ 
(ii) Tollens’ reagent
(iii) Semicarbazide and weak acid (iv) Excess ethanol and acid
(v) Zinc amalgam and dilute hydrochloric acid
12.7 Which of the following compounds would undergo aldol condensation, which
the Cannizzaro reaction and which neither? Write the structures of the expected
products of aldol condensation and Cannizzaro reaction.
(i) Methanal (ii) 2-Methylpentanal (iii) Benzaldehyde
(iv) Benzophenone (v) Cyclohexanone (vi) 1-Phenylpropanone
(vii) Phenylacetaldehyde (viii) Butan-1-ol (ix) 2,2-Dimethylbutanal
12.8 How will you convert ethanal into the following compounds?
(i) Butane-1,3-diol (ii) But-2-enal (iii) But-2-enoic acid
12.9 Write structural formulas and names of four possible aldol condensation
products from propanal and butanal. In each case, indicate which aldehyde
acts as nucleophile and which as electrophile.
12.10 An organic compound with the molecular formula C 9 H 10 O forms 2,4-DNP derivative,
reduces Tollens’ reagent and undergoes Cannizzaro reaction. On vigorous oxidation,
it gives 1,2-benzenedicarboxylic acid. Identify the compound.
12.11 An organic compound (A) (molecular formula C 8 H 16 O 2 ) was hydrolysed with
dilute sulphuric acid to give a carboxylic acid (B) and an alcohol (C). Oxidation
of (C) with chromic acid produced (B). (C) on dehydration gives but-1-ene.
Write equations for the reactions involved.
12.12 Arrange the following compounds in increasing order of their property as indicated:
(i) Acetaldehyde, Acetone, Di- tert -butyl ketone, Methyl tert -butyl ketone
(reactivity towards HCN)
(ii) CH 3 CH 2 CH(Br)COOH, CH 3 CH(Br)CH 2 COOH, (CH 3 ) 2 CHCOOH,
CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 COOH (acid strength)
(iii) Benzoic acid, 4-Nitrobenzoic acid, 3,4-Dinitrobenzoic acid,
4-Methoxybenzoic acid (acid strength)
12.13 Give simple chemical tests to distinguish between the following pairs of compounds.
(i) Propanal and Propanone (ii) Acetophenone and Benzophenone
(iii) Phenol and Benzoic acid (iv) Benzoic acid and Ethyl benzoate
(v) Pentan-2-one and Pentan-3-one (vi) Benzaldehyde and Acetophenone
(vii) Ethanal and Propanal
12.14 How will you prepare the following compounds from benzene? You may use
any inorganic reagent and any organic reagent having not more than one
carbon atom
(i) Methyl benzoate (ii) m -Nitrobenzoic acid
(iii) p -Nitrobenzoic acid (iv) Phenylacetic acid
(v) p -Nitrobenzaldehyde.
12.15 How will you bring about the following conversions in not more than two steps?
(i) Propanone to Propene (ii) Benzoic acid to Benzaldehyde
(iii) Ethanol to 3-Hydroxybutanal (iv) Benzene to m -Nitroacetophenone
(v) Benzaldehyde to Benzophenone (vi) Bromobenzene to 1-Phenylethanol
(vii) Benzaldehyde to 3-Phenylpropan-1-ol
(viii) Benazaldehyde to α -Hydroxyphenylacetic acid
(ix) Benzoic acid to m - Nitrobenzyl alcohol
12.16 Describe the following:
(i) Acetylation (ii) Cannizzaro reaction
(iii) Cross aldol condensation (iv) Decarboxylation
2020-21

387 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids
12.17 Complete each synthesis by giving missing starting material, reagent or products
12.18 Give plausible explanation for each of the following:
(i) Cyclohexanone forms cyanohydrin in good yield but 2,2,6-trimethylcyclo-
hexanone does not.
(ii) There are two –NH 2 groups in semicarbazide. However, only one is involved
in the formation of semicarbazones.
(iii) During the preparation of esters from a carboxylic acid and an alcohol in
the presence of an acid catalyst, the water or the ester should be removed
as soon as it is formed.
12.19 An organic compound contains 69.77% carbon, 11.63% hydrogen and rest oxygen.
The molecular mass of the compound is 86. It does not reduce Tollens’ reagent
but forms an addition compound with sodium hydrogensulphite and give positive
iodoform test. On vigorous oxidation it gives ethanoic and propanoic acid. Write
the possible structure of the compound.
12.20 Although phenoxide ion has more number of resonating structures than
carboxylate ion, carboxylic acid is a stronger acid than phenol. Why?
Answers to Some Intext Questions
12.1
(i) (iv)
(ii) (v)
(iii) 
(vi)
2020-21

388 Chemistry
12.3 CH
3
CH
2
CH
3 
< CH
3
OCH
3 
< CH
3
CHO < CH
3
CH
2
OH
12.4 (i) Butanone < Propanone < Propanal < Ethanal
(ii) Acetophenone < p -Tolualdehyde , Benzaldehyde < p- Nitrobenzaldehyde.
12.5
12.6 (i) 3-Phenylpropanoic acid (ii) 3-Methylbut-2-enoic acid
(iii) 2-Methylcyclopentanecarboxylic acid. (iv) 2,4,6-Trinitrobenzoic acid
12.7
12.8
12.2
(i)
(iii)
(ii)
(iv)
(i) (iii) (ii) (iv)
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
2020-21
