General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements 149
6
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to:
• appreciate the contribution of
Indian traditions in the
metallurgical processes,
• explain the terms minerals,
ores, concentration, benefaction,
calcination, roasting, refining, etc.;
• understand the principles of
oxidation and reduction as applied
to the extraction procedures;
• apply the thermodynamic
concepts like that of Gibbs energy
and entropy to the principles of
extraction of Al, Cu, Zn and Fe;
• explain why reduction of certain
oxides like Cu 2 O is much easier
than that of Fe 2 O 3 ;
• explain why CO is a favourable
reducing agent at certain
temperatures while coke is better
in some other cases;
• explain why specific reducing
agents are used for the reduction
purposes.
Thermodynamics illustrates why only a certain reducing element
and a minimum specific temperature are suitable for reduction of a
metal oxide to the metal in an extraction.
General Principles and
Processes of Isolation
of Elements
General Principles and
Processes of Isolation
of Elements
6
Unit Unit Unit Unit Unit
The history of civilisation is linked to the use of metals
in antiquity in many ways. Different periods of early
human civilisations have been named after metals.
The skill of extraction of metals gave many metals
and brought about several changes in the human
society. It gave weapons, tools, ornaments, utensils,
etc., and enriched the cultural life. The ‘Seven metals
of antiquity’ , as they are sometimes called, are gold,
copper, silver, lead, tin, iron and mercury. Although
modern metallurgy had exponential growth after
Industrial Revolution, it is interesting to note that
many modern concepts in metallurgy have their roots
in ancient practices that pre-dated the Industrial
Revolution. For over 7000 years, India has had a
rich tradition of metallurgical skills.
The two important sources for the history of Indian
metallurgy are archaeological excavations and literary
evidences. The first evidence of metal in Indian
subcontinent comes from Mehrgarh in Baluchistan,
where a small copper bead, dated to about 6000
BCE was found. It is however thought to be native
copper, which has not been extracted from the ore.
Spectrometric studies on copper ore samples obtained
from the ancient mine pits at Khetri in Rajasthan and
on metal samples cut from representative Harappan
Objectives
2020-21

150 Chemistry
artefacts recovered from Mitathal in Haryana and eight other sites
distributed in Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra
prove that copper metallurgy in India dates back to the Chalcolithic
cultures in the subcontinent. Indian chalcolithic copper objects were
in all probability made indigenously. The ore for extraction of metal for
making the objects was obtained from chalcopyrite ore deposits in
Aravalli Hills. Collection of archaeological texts from copper-plates and
rock-inscriptions have been compiled and published by the
Archaeological Survey of India during the past century. Royal records
were engraved on copper plates (tamra-patra) . Earliest known copper-
plate has a Mauryan record that mentions famine relief efforts. It has
one of the very few pre-Ashoka Brahmi inscriptions in India.
Harappans also used gold and silver, as well as their joint alloy
electrum. Variety of ornaments such as pendants, bangles, beads and
rings have been found in ceramic or bronze pots. Early gold and silver
ornaments have been found from Indus Valley sites such as
Mohenjodaro (3000 BCE). These are on display in the National Museum,
New Delhi. India has the distinction of having the deepest ancient gold
mines in the world, in the Maski region of Karnataka. Carbon dating
places them in mid 1st millennium BCE.
Hymns of Rigveda give earliest indirect references to the alluvial
placer gold deposits in India. The river Sindhu was an important source
of gold in ancient times. It is interesting that the availability of alluvial
placer gold in the river Sindhu has been reported in modern times also.
It has been reported that there are great mines of gold in the region of
Mansarovar and in Thokjalyug even now. The Pali text, Anguttara Nikaya
narrates the process of the recovery of gold dust or particles from alluvial
placer gold deposits. Although evidence of gold refining is available in
Vedic texts, it is Kautilya’s Arthashastra , authored probably in 3rd or
4th century BCE, during Mauryan era, which has much data on
prevailing chemical practices in a long section on mines and minerals
including metal ores of gold, silver, copper, lead, tin and iron. Kautilya
describes a variety of gold called rasviddha , which is naturally occurring
gold solution. Kalidas also mentioned about such solutions. It is
astonishing how people recognised such solutions.
The native gold has different colours depending upon the nature and
amount of impurity present in it. It is likely that the different colours of
native gold were a major driving force for the development of gold refining.
Recent excavations in central parts of Ganges Valley and Vindhya
hills have shown that iron was produced there possibly as early as in
1800 BCE. In the recent excavations conducted by the Uttar Pradesh
State Archaeological Department, iron furnaces, artefacts, tuyers and
layers of slag have been found. Radiocarbon dating places them between
BCE 1800 and 1000. The results of excavation indicate that the
knowledge of iron smelting and manufacturing of iron artefacts was
well known in Eastern Vindhyas and it was in use in the Central
Ganga Plains, at least from the early 2nd millennium BCE. The quantity
and types of iron artefacts and the level of technical advancements
indicate that working of iron would have been introduced much earlier.
2020-21

General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements 151
The evidence indicates early use of iron in other areas of the country,
which proves that India was indeed an independent centre for the
development of the working of iron.
Iron smelting and the use of iron was especially established in
South Indian megalithic cultures. The forging of wrought iron seems
to have been at peak in India in the Ist millennium CE. Greek accounts
report the manufacture of steel in India by crucible process. In this
process, iron, charcoal and glass were mixed together in a crucible
and heated until the iron melted and absorbed the carbon. India was
a major innovator in the production of advanced quality steel. Indian
steel was called ‘the Wonder Material of the Orient’. A Roman historian,
Quintus Curtius, records that one of the gifts Porus of Taxila (326
BCE) gave to Alexander the Great was some two-and-a-half tons of
Wootz steel. Wootz steel is primarily iron containing a high proportion
of carbon (1.0 – 1.9%). Wootz is the English version of the word ‘ukku’
which is used for steel in Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. Literary
accounts suggest that Indian Wootz steel from southern part of the
Indian subcontinent was exported to Europe, China and Arab world.
It became prominent in the Middle East where it was named as
Damasus Steel. Michael Faraday tried to duplicate this steel by alloying
iron with a variety of metals, including noble metals, but failed.
When iron ore is reduced in solid state by using charcoal, porous
iron blocks are formed. Therefore, reduced iron blocks are also called
sponge iron blocks. Any useful product can be obtained from this
material only after removing the porosity by hot forging. The iron so
obtained is termed as wrought iron. An exciting example of wrought
iron produced in ancient India is the world famous Iron Pillar. It was
erected in its present position in Delhi in 5th century CE. The Sanskrit
inscription engraved on it suggests that it was brought here from
elsewhere during the Gupta Period. The average composition (weight%)
of the components present in the wrought iron of the pillar, besides
iron, are 0.15% C, 0.05% Si, 0.05% Mn, 0.25% P, 0.005% Ni, 0.03%
Cu and 0.02% N. The most significant aspect of the pillar is that there
is no sign of corrosion inspite of the fact that it has been exposed to
the atmosphere for about 1,600 years.
Radiocarbon dating of charcoal from iron slag revealed evidence
of continuous smelting in Khasi Hills of Meghalaya. The slag layer,
which is dated to 353 BCE – CE 128, indicates that Khasi Hill region
is the earliest iron smelting site studied in the entire region of North
East India. The remnants of former iron-ore excavation and iron
manufacturing are visible even now in the landscape of Khasi Hills.
British naturalists who visited Meghalaya in early 19th century
described the iron industry that had developed in the upper part of
the Khasi Hills.
There is archaeological evidence of zinc production in Rajasthan
mines at Zawar from the 6th or 5th BCE. India was the first country
to master zinc distillation. Due to low boiling point, zinc tends to
vapourise while its ore is smelted. Pure zinc could be produced after
a sophisticated ‘downward’ distillation technique in which the vapour
2020-21

152 Chemistry
was condensed in a lower container. This technique was also applied
to mercury. Indian metallurgists were masters in this technique. This
has been described in Sanskrit texts of 14th century.
Indians had knowledge about mercury. They used it for medicinal
purpose. Development of mining and metallurgy declined during the British
colonial era. By the 19th century, once flourished mines of Rajasthan were
mostly abandoned and became almost extinct. In 1947 when India got
independence, European literature on science had already found its way
slowly into the country. Thus, in post independence era, the Government
of India initiated the process of nation building through the establishment
of various institutes of science and technology. In the following sections, we
will learn about the modern methods of extraction of elements.
A few elements like carbon, sulphur, gold and noble gases, occur in free
state while others are found in combined forms in the earth’s crust.
Elements vary in abundance. Among metals, aluminium is the most
abundant. In fact, it is the third most abundant element in earth’s crust
(8.3% approx. by weight). It is a major component of many igneous
minerals including mica and clays. Many gemstones are impure forms
of Al 2 O 3 . For example, gems ‘ruby’ and ‘sapphire’ have Cr and Co
respectively as impurity. Iron is the second most abundant metal in the
earth’s crust. It forms a variety of compounds and their various uses
make it a very important element. It is one of the essential elements in
biological systems as well.
For obtaining a particular metal, first we look for minerals which
are naturally occurring chemical substances in the earth’s crust and
are obtained through mining. Out of many minerals in which a metal
may be found, only a few are viable to be used as source of that metal.
Such minerals are known as ores .
The principal ores of aluminium, iron, copper and zinc are given
in Table 6.1.
6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1 Occurrence of Occurrence of Occurrence of Occurrence of Occurrence of
Metals Metals Metals Metals Metals
Aluminium Bauxite AlO x (OH) 3-2x
[where 0 < x < 1]
Kaolinite (a form of clay) [Al 2 (OH) 4 Si 2 O 5 ]
Iron Haematite Fe 2 O 3
Magnetite Fe 3 O 4
Siderite FeCO 3
Iron pyrites FeS 2
Copper Copper pyrites CuFeS 2
Malachite CuCO 3 .Cu(OH) 2
Cuprite Cu 2 O
Copper glance Cu 2 S
Zinc Zinc blende or Sphalerite ZnS
Calamine ZnCO 3
Zincite ZnO
Metal Ores Composition
Table 6.1: Principal Ores of Some Important Metals
A particular element may occur in a variety of compounds. The
process of isolation of element from its compound should be such that
it is chemically feasible and commercially viable.
2020-21

General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements 153
For the purpose of extraction, bauxite is chosen for aluminium. For
iron, usually the oxide ores which are abundant and do not produce
polluting gases (like SO 2 that is produced in case of iron pyrites) are
taken. For copper and zinc, any of the ores listed in Table 6.1 may be
used depending upon the availability and other relevant factors.
The entire scientific and technological process used for isolation of
the metal from its ore is known as metallurgy . The extraction and
isolation of an element from its combined form involves various
principles of chemistry. Still, some general principles are common to
all the extraction processes of metals.
An ore rarely contains only a desired substance. It is usually
contaminated with earthly or undesired materials known as gangue .
The extraction and isolation of metals from ores involves the following
major steps:
• Concentration of the ore,
• Isolation of the metal from its concentrated ore, and
• Purification of the metal.
In the following Sections, we shall first describe the various steps
for effective concentration of ores. After that principles of some of the
common metallurgical processes will be discussed. Those principles
will include the thermodynamic and electrochemical aspects involved
in the effective reduction of the concentrated ore to the metal.
Removal of the unwanted materials (e.g., sand, clays, etc.) from the ore
is known as concentration , dressing or benefaction . Before proceeding
for concentration, ores are graded and crushed to reasonable size.
Concentration of ores involves several steps and selection of these steps
depends upon the differences in physical properties of the compound of
the metal present and that of the gangue. The type of the metal, the
available facilities and the environmental factors are also taken into
consideration. Some of the important procedures for concentration of
ore are described below.
This is based on the difference between specific gravities of the ore and
the gangue particles. It is therefore a type of gravity separation . In one
such process, an upward stream of running water is used to wash the
powdered ore. The lighter gangue particles are washed away and the
heavier ore particles are left behind.
This is based on differences in magnetic properties of the ore
components. If either the ore or the gangue is attracted towards
magnetic field, then the separation is
carried out by this method. For example
iron ores are attracted towards magnet,
hence, non–magnetic impurities can be
separted from them using magnetic
separation. The powdered ore is
dropped over a conveyer belt which
moves over a magnetic roller (Fig.6.1)
Magnetic substance remains attracted
towards the belt and falls close to it.
6.2.1 Hydraulic
Washing
6.2.2 Magnetic
Separation
6.2 6.2 6.2 6.2 6.2 Concentration Concentration Concentration Concentration Concentration
of Ores of Ores of Ores of Ores of Ores
Fig. 6.1: Magnetic separation
(schematic)
2020-21

154 Chemistry
This method is used for removing gangue from sulphide ores. In this
process, a suspension of the powdered ore is made with water.
Collectors and froth
stabilisers are added to
it. Collectors (e.g., pine
oils, fatty acids, xanthates,
etc.) enhance non-
wettability of the mineral
particles and froth
stabilisers (e.g., cresols,
aniline) stabilise the froth.
The mineral particles
become wet by oils while
the gangue particles by
water. A rotating paddle
agitates the mixture and
draws air in it. As a
result, froth is formed
which carries the mineral
particles. The froth is light
and is skimmed off. It is then dried for recovery of the ore particles.
Sometimes, it is possible to separate two sulphide ores by
adjusting proportion of oil to water or by using ‘ depressants ’.
For example, in the case of an ore containing ZnS and PbS, the
depressant used is NaCN. It selectively prevents ZnS from coming
to the froth but allows PbS to come with the froth.
Leaching is often used if the ore is soluble in some suitable solvent.
Following examples illustrate the procedure:
(a) Leaching of alumina from bauxite
Bauxite is the principal ore of aluminium. It usually contains SiO 2 ,
iron oxides and titanium oxide (TiO 2 ) as impurities. Concentration is
carried out by heating the powdered ore with a concentrated solution
of NaOH at 473 – 523 K and 35 – 36 bar pressure. This process is
called digestion. This way, Al 2 O 3 is extracted out as sodium aluminate.
6.2.4 Leaching
Fig. 6.2: Froth floatation process
6.2.3 Froth
Floatation
Method
The Innovative Washerwoman The Innovative Washerwoman The Innovative Washerwoman The Innovative Washerwoman The Innovative Washerwoman
One can do wonders if he or she has a scientific temperament and is attentive to
observations. A washerwoman had an innovative mind too. While washing a miner’s
overalls, she noticed that sand and similar dirt fell to the bottom of the washtub. What
was peculiar, the copper bearing compounds that had come to the clothes from the mines,
were caught in the soapsuds and so they came to the top. One of her clients, Mrs. Carrie
Everson was a chemist. The washerwoman told her experience to Mrs. Everson. The
latter thought that the idea could be used for separating copper compounds from rocky
and earth materials on large scale. This way an invention came up. At that time only
those ores were used for extraction of copper, which contained large amounts of the metal.
Invention of the Froth Floatation Method made copper mining profitable even from the low-
grade ores. World production of copper soared and the metal became cheaper.

General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements 155
The impurity, SiO 2 too dissolves forming sodium silicate. Other
impurities are left behind.
Al 2 O 3 (s) + 2NaOH(aq) + 3H 2 O(l) → 2Na[Al(OH) 4 ](aq) (6.1)
The sodium aluminate present in solution is neutralised by passing
CO 2 gas and hydrated Al 2 O 3 is precipitated. At this stage, small
amount of freshly prepared sample of hydrated Al 2 O 3 is added to
the solution. This is called seeding. It induces the precipitation.
2Na[Al(OH) 4 ](aq) + 2CO 2 (g) → Al 2 O 3 .xH 2 O(s) + 2NaHCO 3 (aq) (6.2)
Sodium silicate remains in the solution and hydrated alumina is
filtered, dried and heated to give back pure Al 2 O 3 .
Al 2 O 3 .xH 2 O(s) 
1470 K 
Al 2 O 3 (s) + xH 2 O(g) (6.3)
(b) Other examples
In the metallurgy of silver and gold, the respective metal is
leached with a dilute solution of NaCN or KCN in the presence
of air, which supplies O 2 . The metal is obtained later by
replacement reaction.
4M(s) + 8CN
–
(aq)+ 2H 2 O(aq) + O 2 (g) → 4[M(CN) 2 ]
– 
(aq) +
4OH
–
(aq) (M= Ag or Au) (6.4)
( ) [ ] ( ) ( ) ( ) [ ] ( ) ( )
2
2 4
M Zn 2 Zn 2M aq aq CN CN s s
− −
+ → + (6.5)
To extract metal from concentrated ore, it must be converted to a
form which is suitable for reduction to metal. Usually sulphide ores
are converted to oxide before reduction because oxides are easier to
reduce. Thus isolation of metals from concentrated ore involves two
major steps viz .,
(a) conversion to oxide, and
(b) reduction of the oxide to metal.
( a ) Conversion to oxide
(i) Calcination : Calcinaton involves heating. It removes the volatile
matter which escapes leaving behind the metal oxide:
Fe 2 O 3 .xH 2 O(s) 
D 
Fe 2 O 3 (s) + xH 2 O(g) (6.6)
ZnCO 3 (s) 
D 
ZnO(s) + CO 2 (g) (6.7)
CaCO 3 .MgCO 3 (s) 
D 
CaO(s) + MgO(s ) + 2CO 2 (g) (6.8)
(ii) Roasting : In roasting, the ore is heated in a regular supply
of air in a furnace at a temperature below the melting
point of the metal. Some of the reactions involving sulphide
ores are:
Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions
6.1 Which of the ores mentioned in Table 6.1 can be concentrated by
magnetic separation method?
6.2 What is the significance of leaching in the extraction of aluminium?
6.3 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.3 Extraction Extraction Extraction Extraction Extraction
of Crude of Crude of Crude of Crude of Crude
Metal from Metal from Metal from Metal from Metal from
Concentrated Concentrated Concentrated Concentrated Concentrated
O r e O r e O r e O r e O r e
2020-21

156 Chemistry
2ZnS + 3O 2 → 2ZnO + 2SO 2 (6.9)
2PbS + 3O 2 → 2PbO + 2SO 2 (6.10)
2Cu 2 S + 3O 2 → 2Cu 2 O + 2SO 2 (6.11)
The sulphide ores of copper are heated
in reverberatory furnace [Fig. 6.3]. If the
ore contains iron, it is mixed with silica
before heating. Iron oxide ‘slags of ’ * as iron
silicate and copper is produced in the form
of copper matte which contains Cu 2 S and
FeS.
FeO + SiO 2 → FeSiO 3 (6.12)
(slag)
The SO 2 produced is utilised for
manufacturing H 2 SO 4 .
(b) Reduction of oxide to the metal
Reduction of the metal oxide usually
involves heating it with a reducing agent,
for example C, or CO or even another metal.
The reducing agent (e.g., carbon) combines with the oxygen of the
metal oxide.
M x O y + yC → xM + y CO (6.13)
Some metal oxides get reduced easily while others are very difficult
to be reduced (reduction means electron gain by the metal ion). In any
case, heating is required.
Some basic concepts of thermodynamics help us in understanding the
theory of metallurgical transformations. Gibbs energy is the most
significant term. To understand the variation in the temperature required
for thermal reductions and to predict which element will suit as the
reducing agent for a given metal oxide (M x O y ), Gibbs energy
interpretations are made. The criterion for the feasibility of a thermal
reduction is that at a given temperture Gibbs energy change of the
reaction must be negative. The change in Gibbs energy, ∆ G for any
process at any specified temperature, is described by the equation:
∆ G = ∆ H – T ∆ S (6.14)
where, ∆ H is the enthalpy change and ∆ S is the entropy change for
the process.
When the value of ∆ G is negative in equation 6.14, only then the
reaction will proceed. ∆ G can become negative in the following situations:
1. If ∆ S is positive, on increasing the temperature ( T ), the value of
T ∆ S increases so that ∆ H < T ∆ S . In this situation ∆ G will become
negative on increasing temperature.
2. If coupling of the two reactions, i.e. reduction and oxidation,
results in negative value of ∆ G for overall reaction, the final
reaction becomes feasible. Such coupling is easily understood
6 . 4 6 . 4 6 . 4 6 . 4 6 . 4
Thermodynamic Thermodynamic Thermodynamic Thermodynamic Thermodynamic
Principles of Principles of Principles of Principles of Principles of
Metallurgy Metallurgy Metallurgy Metallurgy Metallurgy
Fig. 6.3: A section of a modern
reverberatory furnace
* During metallurgy, ‘flux’ is added which combines with ‘gangue’ to form ‘slag’. Slag separates more easily from
the ore than the gangue. This way, removal of gangue becomes easier.
2020-21

General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements 157
through Gibbs energy ( ∆ r G
V
) vs T plots for the formation of the
oxides (Fig. 6.4). These plots are drawn for free energy changes
that occur when one gram mole of oxygen is consumed.
The graphical representation of Gibbs energy was first used by H.J.T.
Ellingham. This provides a sound basis for considering the choice of
reducing agent in the reduction of oxides. This is known as Ellingham
Diagram . Such diagrams help us in predicting the feasibility of thermal
reduction of an ore.
As we know, during reduction, the oxide of a metal decomposes
and the reducing agent takes away the oxygen. The role of reducing
agent is to provide ∆ r G
V
negative and large enough to make the sum
of ∆ r G 
V
of the two reactions, i.e, oxidation of the reducing agent and
reduction of the metal oxide negative.
M x O(s) → xM (solid or liq) + 
1
2 
O 2 (g) (6.15)
If reduction is carried out by carbon the oxidation of the reducing
agent (i.e., C) will be there:
2
1
C(s) + O (g) CO(g)
2 
→ (6.16)
There may also be complete oxidation of carbon to CO 2 .
2 2
1 1 1
C(s) + O (g) CO (g)
2 2 2
→ (6.17)
Fig. 6.4: Gibbs energy ( ∆
r
G
V
) vs T plots (schematic) for the formation of some
oxides per mole of oxygen consumed (Ellingham diagram)
2020-21

158 Chemistry
On coupling (combing) reaction 6.15 and 6.16 we get:
M x O(s) + C(s) → xM(s or l) + CO(g) (6.18)
On coupling reaction 6.15 and 6.17 we have
M x O(s) + 
1
2 
C(s) → xM(s or l) + 
1
2 
CO 2 (g) (6.19)
Similarly, if carbon monoxide is reducing agent, reactions 6.15 and
6.20 given below need to be coupled.
CO(g) + 
1
2 
O 2 (g) → CO 2 (g) (6.20)
Over all reaction will be as follows:
M x O(s) + CO(g) → xM(s or l) + CO 2 (g) (6.21)
Ellingham Diagram Ellingham Diagram Ellingham Diagram Ellingham Diagram Ellingham Diagram
(a) Ellingham diagram normally consists of plots of ∆
f
G
V 
vs T for the formation of oxides of
common metals and reducing agents i.e., for the reaction given below.
2xM(s) + O
2
(g) → 2M
x
O(s)
In this reaction, gas is consumed in the formation of oxide hence, molecular randomness
decreases in the formation of oxide which leades to a negative value of ∆ S as a result
sign of T ∆ S term in equation (6.14) becomes positive. Subsequently ∆
f
G
V 
shifts towards
higher side despite rising T. The result is positive slope in the curve for most of the
reactions for the formation of M
x
O(s).
(b) Each plot is a straight line and slopes upwards except when some change in phase
(s → l or l → g) takes place. The temperature at which such change occurs, is indicated
by an increase in the slope on positive side (e.g., in the Zn, ZnO plot, the melting is
indicated by an abrupt change in the curve) [Fig. 6.4].
(c) When temperature is raised, a point is reached in the curve where it crosses ∆
r
G
V
=0
line. Below this temperature, ∆
r
G
V 
for the formation of oxide is negative so M
x
O is stable.
Above this point, free energy of formation of oxide is positive. The oxide, M
x
O will
decompose on its own.
(d) Similar diagrams are constructed for sulfides and halides also. From them it becomes
clear that why reduction of M
x
S is difficult.
Limitations of Ellingham Diagram
1. The graph simply indicates whether a reaction is possible or not, i.e., the tendency of
reduction with a reducing agent is indicated. This is so because it is based only on the
thermodynamic concepts. It does not explain the kinetics of the reduction process. It
cannot answer questions like how fast reduction can proceed? However, it explains why
the reactions are sluggish when every species is in solid state and smooth when the ore
melts down. It is interesting to note here that ∆ H (enthalpy change) and the ∆ S (entropy
change) values for any chemical reaction remain nearly constant even on varying
temperature. So the only dominant variable in equation(6.14) becomes T . However, ∆ S
depends much on the physical state of the compound. Since entropy depends on disorder
or randomness in the system, it will increase if a compound melts (s → l ) or vapourises
( l → g) since molecular randomness increases on changing the phase from solid to liquid or
from liquid to gas.
2. The interpretation of ∆
r
G
V 
is based on K ( ∆ G
V 
= – R T ln K ). Thus it is presumed that the
reactants and products are in equilibrium:
M x O + A red l xM + A red O
This is not always true because the reactant/product may be solid. In commercial processes
reactants and products are in contact for a short time.
2020-21

General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements 159
The reactions 6.18 and 6.21 describe the actual reduction of the
metal oxide, M x O, that we want to accomplish. The ∆ r G
0 
values for
these reactions in general, can be obtained from the corresponding
∆ f G
0 
values of oxides.
As we have seen, heating (i.e., increasing T ) favours a negative value
of ∆ r G
0
. Therefore, the temperature is chosen such that the sum of ∆ r G
0
in the two combined redox processes is negative. In ∆ r G
0 
vs
T plots (Ellingham diagram, Fig. 6.4), this is indicated by the point of
intersection of the two curves, i.e, the curve for the formation of M x O
and that for the formation of the oxide of the reducing substance. After
that point, the ∆ r G
0 
value becomes more negative for the combined
process making the reduction of M x O possible. The difference in the
two ∆ r G
0 
values after that point determines whether reduction of the
oxide of the element of the upper line is feasible by the element of
which oxide formation is represented by the lower line. If the difference
is large, the reduction is easier.
(a) Extraction of iron from its oxides
After concentration, mixture of oxide ores of iron (Fe 2 O 3 , Fe 3 O 4 ) is
subjected to calcination / roasting to remove water, to decompose
carbonates and to oxidise sulphides. After that these are mixed with
limestone and coke and fed into a Blast furnace from its top, in
which the oxide is reduced to the metal. In the Blast furnace,
6.4.1 Applications
Suggest a condition under which magnesium could reduce alumina.
The two equations are:
(a) 
4
3 
Al + O 2 → 
2
3 
Al 2 O 3 (b) 2Mg +O 2 → 2MgO
At the point of intersection of the Al 2 O 3 and MgO curves (marked “A”
in diagram 6.4), the ∆ r G
0 
becomes ZERO for the reaction:
2
3 
Al 2 O 3 +2Mg → 2MgO + 
4
3 
Al
Below that point magnesium can reduce alumina.
Although thermodynamically feasible, in practice, magnesium metal is not
used for the reduction of alumina in the metallurgy of aluminium. Why ?
Temperatures below the point of intersection of Al 2 O 3 and MgO curves,
magnesium can reduce alumina. But the process will be uneconomical.
Why is the reduction of a metal oxide easier if the metal formed is in
liquid state at the temperature of reduction?
The entropy is higher if the metal is in liquid state than when it is in
solid state. The value of entropy change ( ∆ S ) of the reduction process
is more on positive side when the metal formed is in liquid state and
the metal oxide being reduced is in solid state. Thus the value of ∆ r G
V
becomes more on negative side and the reduction becomes easier.
Example 6.2 Example 6.2 Example 6.2 Example 6.2 Example 6.2
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
Example 6.3 Example 6.3 Example 6.3 Example 6.3 Example 6.3
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
Example 6.1 Example 6.1 Example 6.1 Example 6.1 Example 6.1
2020-21

160 Chemistry
Fig. 6.5: Blast furnace
[Fig. 6.5] reduction of iron oxides takes place at different temperature
ranges. A blast of hot air is blown from the bottom of the furnace
by burning coke in the lower portion to give temperature upto about
2200K. The burning of coke, therefore, supplies most of the heat
required in the process. The CO and heat move to the upper part of
the furnace. In upper part, the temperature is
lower and the iron oxides (Fe 2 O 3 and Fe 3 O 4 )
coming from the top are reduced in steps to FeO.
These reactions can be summarised as follows:
At 500 – 800 K (lower temperature range in
the blast furnace),
Fe 2 O 3 is first reduced to Fe 3 O 4 and then
to FeO
3 Fe 2 O 3 + CO → 2 Fe 3 O 4 + CO 2 (6.22)
Fe 3 O 4 + 4 CO → 3Fe + 4 CO 2 (6.23)
Fe 2 O 3 + CO → 2FeO + CO 2 (6.24)
Limestone is also decomposed to CaO which
removes silicate impurity of the ore as slag. The
slag is in molten state and separates out from
iron.
At 900 – 1500 K (higher temperature range
in the blast furnace):
C + CO 2 → 2 CO (6.25)
FeO + CO → Fe + CO 2 (6.26)
Thermodynamics helps us to understand how
coke reduces the oxide and why this furnace is chosen. One of the
main reduction steps in this process involves reaction 6.27 given below.
FeO(s) + C(s) → Fe(s/l) + CO (g) (6.27)
This reaction can be seen as a reaction in which two simpler
reactions have coupled. In one the reduction of FeO is taking place
and in the other, C is being oxidised to CO:
FeO(s) → Fe(s) + 
1
2 
O 2 (g) (6.28)
C(s) + 
1
2 
O 2 (g) → CO (g) (6.29)
When both the reactions take place to yield the equation (6.27), the
net Gibbs energy change becomes:
∆ r G
0
(C, CO) + ∆ r G
0
(FeO, Fe) = ∆ r G
0 
(6.30)
Naturally, the resultant reaction will take place when the right hand
side in equation 6.30 is negative. In ∆ r G
0 
vs T plot representing the
change Fe → FeO in Fig. 6.6 goes upward and that representing the
change C → CO (C,CO) goes downward. They cross each other at about
1073K. At temperatures above 1073K (approx.), the C, CO line is below
the Fe, FeO line < . So above 1073 K in the range of
temprature 900–1500 K coke will reduce FeO and will itself be oxidised
to CO. Let us try to understand this through Fig. 6.6 (approximate values
of ∆ r G
0 
are given). At about 1673K (1400
o
C) ∆ r G
0 
value for the reaction:
2020-21

General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements 161
2FeO → 2Fe+O 2 is +341 kJmol
-1 
because it is
reverse of Fe → FeO change and for the reaction
2C+O 2 → 2CO ∆ r G
0 
is -447 kJmol
-1
. If we
calculate ∆ r G
0 
value for overall reaction (6.27
the value will be -53 kJmol
-1
). Therefore, reaction
6.27 becomes feasible. In a similar way the
reduction of Fe 3 O 4 and Fe 2 O 3 by CO at relatively
lower temperatures can be explained on the
basis of lower lying points of intersection of their
curves with the CO, CO 2 curve.
The iron obtained from Blast furnace
contains about 4% carbon and many impurities
in smaller amount (e.g., S, P, Si, Mn). This is
known as pig iron . It can be moulded into
variety of shapes. Cast iron is different from pig
iron and is made by melting pig iron with scrap
iron and coke using hot air blast. It has slightly
lower carbon content (about 3%) and is
extremely hard and brittle.
Further Reductions
Wrought iron or malleable iron is the purest form
of commercial iron and is prepared from cast iron
by oxidising impurities in a reverberatory furnace
lined with haematite. The haematite oxidises carbon
to carbon monoxide:
Fe 2 O 3 + 3 C → 2 Fe + 3 CO (6.31)
Limestone is added as a flux and sulphur, silicon and phosphorus
are oxidised and passed into the slag. The metal is removed and freed
from the slag by passing through rollers.
(b) Extraction of copper from cuprous oxide [copper(I) oxide]
In the graph of ∆ r G
0 
vs T for the formation of oxides (Fig. 6.4), the Cu 2 O
line is almost at the top. So it is quite easy to reduce oxide ores of copper
directly to the metal by heating with coke. The lines (C, CO) and
(C, CO 2 ) are at much lower positions in the graph particularly after
500 – 600K. However, many of the ores are sulphides and some may
also contain iron. The sulphide ores are roasted/smelted to give oxides:
2Cu 2 S + 3O 2 → 2Cu 2 O + 2SO 2 (6.32)
The oxide can then be easily reduced to metallic copper using coke:
Cu 2 O + C → 2 Cu + CO (6.33)
In actual process, the ore is heated in a reverberatory furnace after
mixing with silica. In the furnace, iron oxide ‘slags of’ as iron slicate is
formed. Copper is produced in the form of copper matte . This contains
Cu 2 S and FeS.
FeO + SiO 2 → FeSiO 3 (6.34)
(Slag)
Copper matte is then charged into silica lined convertor. Some
silica is also added and hot air blast is blown to convert the remaining
Fig. 6.6: Gibbs energy Vs T plot (schematic) for
the formation of oxides of iron and
carbon (Ellingham diagram)
2020-21

162 Chemistry
FeS, FeO and Cu 2 S/Cu 2 O to the metallic copper. Following reactions
take place:
2FeS + 3O 2 → 2FeO + 2SO 2 (6.35)
FeO + SiO 2 → FeSiO 3 (6.36)
2Cu 2 S + 3O 2 → 2Cu 2 O + 2SO 2 (6.37)
2Cu 2 O + Cu 2 S → 6Cu + SO 2 (6.38)
The solidified copper obtained has blistered appearance due to the
evolution of SO 2 and so it is called blister copper .
(c) Extraction of zinc from zinc oxide
The reduction of zinc oxide is done using coke. The temperature in
this case is higher than that in the case of copper. For the purpose
of heating, the oxide is made into brickettes with coke and clay.
ZnO + C 
coke,1673K 
Zn + CO (6.39)
The metal is distilled off and collected by rapid chilling.
We have seen how principles of thermodyamics are applied to
pyrometallurgy . Similar principles are effective in the reductions of metal
ions in solution or molten state. Here they are reduced by electrolysis or
by adding some reducing element.
In the reduction of a molten metal salt, electrolysis is done. Such
methods are based on electrochemical principles which could be
understood through the equation,
∆ G
0 
= – nE
0
F (6.40)
here n is the number of electrons and E
0 
is the electrode potential of
the redox couple formed in the system. More reactive metals have large
negative values of the electrode potential. So their reduction is difficult.
If the difference of two E
0 
values corresponds to a positive E
0 
and
consequently negative ∆ G
0 
in equation 6.40, then the less reactive metal
will come out of the solution and the more reactive metal will go into
the solution, e.g.,
Cu
2+ 
(aq) + Fe(s) → Cu(s) + Fe
2+ 
(aq) (6.41)
In simple electrolysis, the M
n+ 
ions are discharged at negative
electrodes (cathodes) and deposited there. Precautions are taken
considering the reactivity of the metal produced and suitable materials
are used as electrodes. Sometimes a flux is added for making the
molten mass more conducting.
Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions
6.3 The reaction,
Cr 2 O 3 +2Al → Al 2 O 3 +2Cr ( ∆ r G
0
= – 421kJ)
is thermodynamically feasible as is apparent from the Gibbs energy value.
Why does it not take place at room temperature?
6.4 Is it true that under certain conditions, Mg can reduce Al 2 O 3 and Al can
reduce MgO? What are those conditions?
6.5 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.5
Electrochemical Electrochemical Electrochemical Electrochemical Electrochemical
Principles of Principles of Principles of Principles of Principles of
Metallurgy Metallurgy Metallurgy Metallurgy Metallurgy
2020-21

General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements 163
Aluminium
In the metallurgy of aluminium, purified Al 2 O 3 is mixed with Na 3 AlF 6
or CaF 2 which lowers the melting point of the mixture and brings
conductivity. The fused matrix is electrolysed.
Steel vessel with lining of carbon acts as
cathode and graphite anode is used. The
overall reaction may be written as:
2Al 2 O 3 + 3C → 4Al + 3CO 2 (6.42)
This process of electrolysis is widely
known as Hall-Heroult process .
Thus electrolysis of the molten mass is
carried out in an electrolytic cell using
carbon electrodes. The oxygen liberated at
anode reacts with the carbon of anode
producing CO and CO 2 . This way for each
kg of aluminium produced, about 0.5 kg
of carbon anode is burnt away. The
electrolytic reactions are:
Cathode: Al
3+ 
(melt) + 3e
– 
→ Al(l) (6.43)
Anode: C(s) + O
2– 
(melt) → CO(g) + 2e
– 
(6.44)
C(s) + 2O
2– 
(melt) → CO 2 (g) + 4e
– 
(6.45)
Copper from Low Grade Ores and Scraps
Copper is extracted by hydrometallurgy from low grade ores. It is leached
out using acid or bacteria. The solution containing Cu
2+ 
is treated with
scrap iron or H 2 (equations 6.40; 6.46).
Cu
2+
(aq) + H 2 (g) → Cu(s) + 2H
+ 
(aq) (6.46)
Besides reductions, some extractions are based on oxidation particularly
for non-metals. A very common example of extraction based on
oxidation is the extraction of chlorine from brine (chlorine is abundant
in sea water as common salt) .
2Cl
–
(aq) + 2H 2 O(l) → 2OH
–
(aq) + H 2 (g) + Cl 2 (g) (6.47)
The ∆ G
0 
for this reaction is + 422 kJ. When it is converted to E
0
(using ∆ G
0 
= – nE
0
F), we get E
0 
= – 2.2 V. Naturally, it will require an
external emf that is greater than 2.2 V. But the electrolysis requires an
excess potential to overcome some other hindering reactions (Unit–3,
Section 3.5.1). Thus, Cl 2 is obtained by electrolysis giving out H 2 and
aqueous NaOH as by-products. Electrolysis of molten NaCl is also
carried out. But in that case, Na metal is produced and not NaOH.
6.6 6.6 6.6 6.6 6.6 Oxidation Oxidation Oxidation Oxidation Oxidation
Reduction Reduction Reduction Reduction Reduction
Fig. 6.7: Electrolytic cell for the
extraction of aluminium
At a site, low grade copper ores are available and zinc and iron scraps
are also available. Which of the two scraps would be more suitable for
reducing the leached copper ore and why?
Zinc being above iron in the electrochemical series (more reactive
metal is zinc), the reduction will be faster in case zinc scraps are
used. But zinc is costlier metal than iron so using iron scraps will be
advisable and advantageous.
Example 6.4 Example 6.4 Example 6.4 Example 6.4 Example 6.4
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
2020-21

164 Chemistry
As studied earlier, extraction of gold and silver involves leaching the
metal with CN
–
. This is also an oxidation reaction (Ag → Ag
+ 
or Au → Au
+
).
The metal is later recovered by displacement method.
4Au(s) + 8CN
–
(aq) + 2H 2 O(aq) + O 2 (g) →
4[Au(CN) 2 ]
–
(aq) + 4OH
–
(aq) (6.48)
2[Au(CN) 2 ]
–
(aq) + Zn(s) → 2Au(s) + [Zn(CN) 4 ]
2– 
(aq) (6.49)
In this reaction zinc acts as a reducing agent.
A metal extracted by any method is usually contaminated with some
impurity. For obtaining metals of high purity, several techniques are
used depending upon the differences in properties of the metal and the
impurity. Some of them are listed below.
(a) Distillation (b) Liquation
(c) Electrolysis (d) Zone refining
(e) Vapour phase refining (f ) Chromatographic methods
These are described in detail here.
(a) Distillation
This is very useful for low boiling metals like zinc and mercury.
The impure metal is evaporated to obtain the pure metal as distillate.
(b) Liquation
In this method a low melting metal like tin can be made to flow on
a sloping surface. In this way it is separated from higher melting
impurities.
(c) Electrolytic refining
In this method, the impure metal is made to act as anode. A strip
of the same metal in pure form is used as cathode. They are put in
a suitable electrolytic bath containing soluble salt of the same metal.
The more basic metal remains in the solution and the less basic ones
go to the anode mud. This process is also explained using the concept
of electrode potential, over potential, and Gibbs energy which you
have seen in previous sections. The reactions are:
Anode: M → M
n+ 
+ ne
–
Cathode: M
n+ 
+ ne
– 
→ M (6.50)
Copper is refined using an electrolytic method. Anodes are of
impure copper and pure copper strips are taken as cathode. The
electrolyte is acidified solution of copper sulphate and the net result
of electrolysis is the transfer of copper in pure form from the anode
to the cathode:
Anode: Cu → Cu
2+ 
+ 2 e
–
Cathode: Cu
2+ 
+ 2e
– 
→ Cu (6.51)
Impurities from the blister copper deposit as anode mud which
contains antimony, selenium, tellurium, silver, gold and platinum;
recovery of these elements may meet the cost of refining. Zinc may
also be refined this way.
6.7 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.7 Refining Refining Refining Refining Refining
2020-21

General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements 165
(d) Zone refining
This method is based on the principle that the impurities are more
soluble in the melt than in the solid state of the metal. A mobile heater
surrounding the rod of impure metal is fixed at its one end
(Fig. 6.8). The molten zone moves along with the heater which is
moved forward. As the heater moves forward, the pure metal crystallises
out of the melt left behind and the impurities
pass on into the adjacent new molten zone
created by movement of heaters. The process
is repeated several times and the heater is
moved in the same direction again and again.
Impurities get concentrated at one end. This
end is cut off. This method is very useful for
producing semiconductor and other metals of
very high purity, e.g., germanium, silicon,
boron, gallium and indium.
(e) Vapour phase refining
In this method, the metal is converted into its volatile compound
which is collected and decomposed to give pure metal. So, the two
requirements are:
(i) the metal should form a volatile compound with an available
reagent,
(ii) the volatile compound should be easily decomposable, so that
the recovery is easy.
Following examples will illustrate this technique.
Mond Process for Refining Nickel: In this process, nickel is heated
in a stream of carbon monoxide forming a volatile complex named as
nickel tetracarbonyl. This compex is decomposed at higher temperature
to obtain pure metal.
Ni + 4CO 
330 – 350 K 
Ni(CO) 4 (6.52)
Ni(CO) 4
450 – 470 K 
Ni + 4CO (6.53)
van Arkel Method for Refining Zirconium or Titanium : This method is
very useful for removing all the oxygen and nitrogen present in the
form of impurity in certain metals like Zr and Ti. The crude metal is
heated in an evacuated vessel with iodine. The metal iodide being
more covalent, volatilises:
Zr + 2I 2 → ZrI 4 (6.54)
The metal iodide is decomposed on a tungsten filament, electrically
heated to about 1800K. The pure metal deposits on the filament.
ZrI 4 → Zr + 2I 2 (6.55)
(f) Chromatographic methods
You have learnt about chromatographic technique of purification of
substances in Class XI (Unit–12).
Fig. 6.8: Fig. 6.8: Fig. 6.8: Fig. 6.8: Fig. 6.8: Zone refining process
2020-21

166 Chemistry
Summary Summary Summary Summary Summary
Although modern metallurgy had exponential growth after Industrial Revolution,
many modern concepts in metallurgy have their roots in ancient practices that
predated the Industrial Revolution. For over 7000 years, India has had high tradition
of metallurigical skills. Ancient Indian metallurgists have made major contributions
which deserve their place in metallurgical history of the world. In the case of zinc
and high–carbon steel, ancient India contributed significantly for the developemnt
of base for the modern metallurgical advancements which induced metallurgical
study leading to Industrial Revolution.
Metals are required for a variety of purposes. For this, we need their extraction from
the minerals in which they are present and from which their extraction is
commercially feasible.These minerals are known as ores . Ores of the metal are
associated with many impurities. Removal of these impurities to certain extent is
achieved in concentration steps. The concentrated ore is then treated chemically
for obtaining the metal. Usually the metal compounds (e.g., oxides, sulphides) are
reduced to the metal. The reducing agents used are carbon, CO or even some metals.
Column chromatography is very useful for purification of the
elements which are available in minute quantities and the impurities
are not very different in chemical properties from the element to be
purified.
Aluminium foils are used as wrappers for food materials. The fine
dust of the metal is used in paints and lacquers. Aluminium, being
highly reactive, is also used in the extraction of chromium and
manganese from their oxides. Wires of aluminium are used as
electricity conductors. Alloys containing aluminium, being light,
are very useful.
Copper is used for making wires used in electrical industry and for
water and steam pipes. It is also used in several alloys that are rather
tougher than the metal itself, e.g., brass (with zinc), bronze (with tin)
and coinage alloy (with nickel).
Zinc is used for galvanising iron. It is also used in large quantities
in batteries. It is constituent of many alloys, e.g., brass, (Cu 60%, Zn
40%) and german silver (Cu 25-30%, Zn 25-30%, Ni 40–50%). Zinc
dust is used as a reducing agent in the manufacture of dye-stuffs,
paints, etc.
Cast iron, which is the most important form of iron, is used for
casting stoves, railway sleepers, gutter pipes , toys, etc. It is used in the
manufacture of wrought iron and steel. Wrought iron is used in
making anchors, wires, bolts, chains and agricultural implements. Steel
finds a number of uses. Alloy steel is obtained when other metals are
added to it. Nickel steel is used for making cables, automobiles and
aeroplane parts, pendulum, measuring tapes. Chrome steel is used for
cutting tools and crushing machines, and stainless steel is used for
cycles, automobiles, utensils, pens, etc.
6.8 6.8 6.8 6.8 6.8 Uses of Uses of Uses of Uses of Uses of
Aluminium, Aluminium, Aluminium, Aluminium, Aluminium,
Copper Copper Copper Copper Copper, Zinc , Zinc , Zinc , Zinc , Zinc
and Iron and Iron and Iron and Iron and Iron
2020-21

General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements 167
In these reduction processes, the thermodynamic and electrochemical concepts
are given due consideration. The metal oxide reacts with a reducing agent; the
oxide is reduced to the metal and the reducing agent is oxidised. In the two reactions,
the net Gibbs energy change is negative, which becomes more negative on raising
the temperature. Conversion of the physical states from solid to liquid or to gas,
and formation of gaseous states favours decrease in the Gibbs energy for the entire
system. This concept is graphically displayed in plots of ∆ G
0 
vs T (Ellingham diagram)
for such oxidation/reduction reactions at different temperatures. The concept of
electrode potential is useful in the isolation of metals (e.g., Al, Ag, Au) where the
sum of the two redox couples is positive so that the Gibbs energy change is negative.
The metals obtained by usual methods still contain minor impurities. Getting pure
metals requires refining . Refining process depends upon the differences in
properties of the metal and the impurities. Extraction of aluminium is usually carried
out from its bauxite ore by leaching it with NaOH. Sodium aluminate, thus formed,
is separated and then neutralised to give back the hydrated oxide, which is then
electrolysed using cryolite as a flux. Extraction of iron is done by reduction of its
oxide ore in blast furnace. Copper is extracted by smelting and heating in a
reverberatory furnace. Extraction of zinc from zinc oxides is done using coke. Several
methods are employed in refining the metal. Metals, in general, are very widely
used and have contributed significantly in the development of a variety of industries.
A Summary of the Occurrence and Extraction of some Metals is
Presented in the following Table
Metal Occurrence 
Common method 
Remarks
of extraction
Aluminium
Iron
Copper
Zinc
1. Bauxite, Al 2 O 3 . x H 2 O
2. Cryolite, Na 3 AlF 6
1. Haematite, Fe 2 O 3
2. Magnetite, Fe 3 O 4
1. Copper pyrites, CuFeS 2
2. Copper glance, Cu 2 S
3. Malachite,
CuCO 3 .Cu(OH) 2
4. Cuprite, Cu 2 O
1. Zinc blende or
Sphalerite, ZnS
2. Calamine, ZnCO 3
3. Zincite, ZnO
Electrolysis of
Al 2 O 3 dissolved in
molten Na 3 AlF 6
Reduction of the
oxide with CO
and coke in Blast
furnace
Roasting of
sulphide
partially and
reduction
Roasting followed
by reduction with
coke
For the extraction, a
good source of
electricity is required.
Temperature
approaching 2170 K
is required.
It is self reduction in a
specially designed
converter. The
reduction takes place
easily. Sulphuric acid
leaching is also used
in hydrometallurgy for
low grade ores.
The metal may be
purified by fractional
distillation.
2020-21

168 Chemistry
6.1 Copper can be extracted by hydrometallurgy but not zinc. Explain.
6.2 What is the role of depressant in froth floatation process?
6.3 Why is the extraction of copper from pyrites more difficult than that from its
oxide ore through reduction?
6.4 Explain: (i) Zone refining (ii) Column chromatography.
6.5 Out of C and CO, which is a better reducing agent at 673 K ?
6.6 Name the common elements present in the anode mud in electrolytic refining
of copper. Why are they so present ?
6.7 Write down the reactions taking place in different zones in the blast furnace
during the extraction of iron.
6.8 Write chemical reactions taking place in the extraction of zinc from zinc blende.
6.9 State the role of silica in the metallurgy of copper.
6.10 Which method of refining may be more suitable if element is obtained in minute
quantity?
6.11 Which method of refining will you suggest for an element in which impurities
present have chemical properties close to the properties of that elements?
6.12 Describe a method for refining nickel.
6.13 How can you separate alumina from silica in a bauxite ore associated with
silica? Give equations, if any.
6.14 Giving examples, differentiate between ‘roasting’ and ‘calcination’.
6.15 How is ‘cast iron’ different from ‘pig iron”?
6.16 Differentiate between “minerals” and “ores”.
6.17 Why copper matte is put in silica lined converter?
6.18 What is the role of cryolite in the metallurgy of aluminium?
6.19 How is leaching carried out in case of low grade copper ores?
6.20 Why is zinc not extracted from zinc oxide through reduction using CO?
6.21 The value of ∆
f
G
0 
for formation of Cr
2 
O
3 
is – 540 kJmol
−1
and that of Al
2 
O
3 
is
– 827 kJmol
−1
. Is the reduction of Cr
2 
O
3 
possible with Al ?
6.22 Out of C and CO, which is a better reducing agent for ZnO ?
6.23 The choice of a reducing agent in a particular case depends on thermodynamic
factor. How far do you agree with this statement? Support your opinion with
two examples.
6.24 Name the processes from which chlorine is obtained as a by-product. What
will happen if an aqueous solution of NaCl is subjected to electrolysis?
6.25 What is the role of graphite rod in the electrometallurgy of aluminium?
6.26 Outline the principles of refining of metals by the following methods:
(i) Zone refining
(ii) Electrolytic refining
(iii) Vapour phase refining
6.27 Predict conditions under which Al might be expected to reduce MgO.
(Hint: See Intext question 6.4)
Exercises Exercises Exercises Exercises Exercises
2020-21

General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements 169
Answers to Some Intext Questions
6.1 Ores in which one of the components (either the impurity or the actual ore) is
magnetic can be concentrated, e.g., ores containing iron (haematite, magnetite,
siderite and iron pyrites).
6.2 Leaching is significant as it helps in removing the impurities like SiO
2
, Fe
2
O
3
,
etc. from the bauxite ore.
6.3 Certain amount of activation energy is essential even for such reactions which
are thermodynamically feasible, therefore heating is required.
6.4 Yes, below 1350°C Mg can reduce Al
2
O
3 
and above 1350°C, Al can reduce MgO.
This can be inferred from ∆ G
V 
Vs T plots (Fig. 6.4).
2020-21
