After studying this Unit you will be
able to
• visualise the importance of
Chemistry in daily life;
• explain the term ‘chemotherapy’;
• describe the basis of classification
of drugs;
• explain drug-target interaction of
enzymes and receptors;
• explain how various types of
drugs function in the body;
• know about artificial sweetening
agents and food preservatives;
• discuss the chemistry of cleansing
agents.
Objectives
From living perception to abstract thought, and from this to practice.
V.I. Lenin.
16
Unit Unit Unit Unit Unit
16
Chemistr Chemistr Chemistr Chemistr Chemistry y y y y in in in in in
E E E E Ev v v v ver er er er eryday yday yday yday yday L L L L Life ife ife ife ife
Chemistr Chemistr Chemistr Chemistr Chemistry y y y y in in in in in
E E E E Ev v v v ver er er er eryday yday yday yday yday L L L L Life ife ife ife ife
By now, you have learnt the basic principles of
chemistry and also realised that it influences every
sphere of human life. The principles of chemistry have
been used for the benefit of mankind. Think of
cleanliness — the materials like soaps, detergents,
household bleaches, tooth pastes, etc. will come to your
mind. Look towards the beautiful clothes — immediately
chemicals of the synthetic fibres used for making clothes
and chemicals giving colours to them will come to your
mind. Food materials — again a number of chemicals
about which you have learnt in the previous Unit will
appear in your mind. Of course, sickness and diseases
remind us of medicines — again chemicals. Explosives,
fuels, rocket propellents, building and electronic
materials, etc., are all chemicals. Chemistry has
influenced our life so much that we do not even realise
that we come across chemicals at every moment; that
we ourselves are beautiful chemical creations and all
our activities are controlled by chemicals. In this Unit,
we shall learn the application of Chemistry in three
important and interesting areas, namely – medicines,
food materials and cleansing agents.
Drugs are chemicals of low molecular masses (~100 – 500u). These
interact with macromolecular targets and produce a biological response.
When the biological response is therapeutic and useful, these chemicals
are called medicines and are used in diagnosis, prevention and
treatment of diseases. Most of the drugs used as medicines are potential
poisons, if taken in doses higher than those recommended. Use of
chemicals for therapeutic effect is called chemotherapy .
16.1 16.1 16.1 16.1 16.1 Drugs and Drugs and Drugs and Drugs and Drugs and
their their their their their
Classification Classification Classification Classification Classification
2020-21

448 Chemistry
Drugs can be classified mainly on criteria outlined as follows:
(a) On the basis of pharmacological effect
This classification is based on pharmacological effect of the drugs. It
is useful for doctors because it provides them the whole range of
drugs available for the treatment of a particular type of problem. For
example, analgesics have pain killing effect, antiseptics kill or arrest
the growth of microorganisms.
(b) On the basis of drug action
It is based on the action of a drug on a particular biochemical process.
For example, all antihistamines inhibit the action of the compound,
histamine which causes inflammation in the body. There are various
ways in which action of histamines can be blocked. You will learn
about this in Section 16.3.2.
(c) On the basis of chemical structure
It is based on the chemical structure of the drug. Drugs classified in this
way share common structural features and often have similar
pharmacological activity. For example, sulphonamides have common
structural feature, given below.
Structural features of sulphonamides
(d) On the basis of molecular targets
Drugs usually interact with biomolecules such as carbohydrates, lipids,
proteins and nucleic acids. These are called target molecules or drug
targets. Drugs possessing some common structural features may have
the same mechanism of action on targets. The classification based on
molecular targets is the most useful classification for medicinal chemists.
Macromolecules of biological origin perform various functions in the
body. For example, proteins which perform the role of biological catalysts
in the body are called enzymes , those which are crucial to
communication system in the body are called receptors . Carrier proteins
carry polar molecules across the cell membrane. Nucleic acids have
coded genetic information for the cell. Lipids and carbohydrates are
structural parts of the cell membrane. We shall explain the drug-target
interaction with the examples of enzymes and receptors.
(a) Catalytic action of enzymes
For understanding the interaction between a drug and an enzyme,
it is important to know how do enzymes catalyse the reaction
(Section 5.2.4). In their catalytic activity, enzymes perform two
major functions:
(i) The first function of an enzyme is to hold the substrate for a chemical
reaction. Active sites of enzymes hold the substrate molecule in a
suitable position, so that it can be attacked by the reagent effectively.
16.1.1
Classification of
Drugs
16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 Drug-Target Drug-Target Drug-Target Drug-Target Drug-Target
Interaction Interaction Interaction Interaction Interaction
16.2.1 Enzymes
as Drug
Targets
2020-21

449 Chemistry in Everyday Life
Fig. 16.2
Drug and substrate
competing for active
site
(ii) The second function of an enzyme is to provide functional groups
that will attack the substrate and carry out chemical reaction.
(b) Drug-enzyme interaction
Drugs inhibit any of the above mentioned activities of enzymes. These
can block the binding site of the enzyme and prevent the binding of
substrate, or can inhibit the catalytic activity of the enzyme. Such
drugs are called enzyme inhibitors.
Drugs inhibit the attachment of substrate on active site of enzymes
in two different ways;
(i) Drugs compete with the natural substrate for their attachment
on the active sites of enzymes. Such drugs are called competitive
inhibitors (Fig. 16.2).
Fig. 16.1
(a) Active site of an
enzyme (b) Substrate
(c) Substrate held in
active site of the
enzyme
(ii) Some drugs do not bind to the
enzyme’s active site. These bind
to a different site of enzyme
which is called allosteric site .
This binding of inhibitor at
allosteric site (Fig.16.3) changes
the shape of the active site in
such a way that substrate can-
not recognise it.
If the bond formed between
an enzyme and an inhibitor is
a strong covalent bond and
Substrates bind to the active site of the enzyme through a variety
of interactions such as ionic bonding, hydrogen bonding, van der
Waals interaction or dipole-dipole interaction (Fig. 16.1).
Fig. 16.3: Non-competitive inhibitor changes the active
site of enzyme after binding at allosteric site.
2020-21

450 Chemistry
cannot be broken easily, then the enzyme is blocked permanently.
The body then degrades the enzyme-inhibitor complex and
synthesises the new enzyme.
Receptors are proteins that are crucial to body’s communication
process. Majority of these are embedded in cell membranes (Fig.
16.4). Receptor proteins are embedded in the cell membrane in such
a way that their small part possessing active site projects out of the
surface of the membrane and opens on the outside region of the cell
membrane (Fig. 16.4).
16.2.2 Receptors
as Drug
Targets
Fig. 16.4
Receptor protein
embedded in the cell
membrane, the
active site of the
receptor opens on
the outside region of
the cell.
Fig. 16.5: (a) Receptor receiving chemical messenger
(b) Shape of the receptor changed after attachment of messenger
(c) Receptor regains structure after removal of chemical messenger.
There are a large number of different receptors in the body that
interact with different chemical messengers. These receptors show
selectivity for one chemical messenger over the other because their binding
sites have different shape, structure and amino acid composition.
In the body, message between two neurons and that between neurons
to muscles is communicated through certain chemicals. These chemicals,
known as chemical messengers are received at the binding sites of receptor
proteins. To accommodate a messenger, shape of the receptor site changes.
This brings about the transfer of message into the cell. Thus, chemical
messenger gives message to the cell without entering the cell (Fig. 16.5).
2020-21

451 Chemistry in Everyday Life
Drugs that bind to the receptor site and inhibit its natural function
are called antagonists . These are useful when blocking of message is
required. There are other types of drugs that mimic the natural
messenger by switching on the receptor, these are called agonists .
These are useful when there is lack of natural chemical messenger.
In this Section, we shall discuss the therapeutic action
of a few important classes of drugs.
Over production of acid in the stomach causes irritation and pain. In
severe cases, ulcers are developed in the stomach. Until 1970, only
treatment for acidity was administration of antacids, such as sodium
hydrogencarbonate or a mixture of aluminium and magnesium
hydroxide. However, excessive hydrogencarbonate can make the stomach
alkaline and trigger the production of even more acid. Metal hydroxides
are better alternatives because of being insoluble, these do not increase
the pH above neutrality. These treatments control only symptoms, and
not the cause. Therefore, with these metal salts, the patients cannot be
treated easily. In advanced stages, ulcers become life threatening and its
only treatment is removal of the affected part of the stomach.
A major breakthrough in the treatment of hyperacidity came through
the discovery according to which a chemical, histamine, stimulates the
secretion of pepsin and hydrochloric acid in the stomach. The drug
cimetidine (Tegamet), was designed to prevent the interaction of
histamine with the receptors present in the stomach wall. This resulted
in release of lesser amount of acid. The importance of the drug was
so much that it remained the largest selling drug in the world until
another drug, ranitidine (Zantac), was discovered.
16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3 Therapeutic Action of Therapeutic Action of Therapeutic Action of Therapeutic Action of Therapeutic Action of
Different Classes of Drugs Different Classes of Drugs Different Classes of Drugs Different Classes of Drugs Different Classes of Drugs
16.3.1 Antacids
Histamine is a potent vasodilator. It has various functions. It contracts
the smooth muscles in the bronchi and gut and relaxes other muscles,
such as those in the walls of fine blood vessels. Histamine is also
responsible for the nasal congestion associated with common cold and
allergic response to pollen.
Synthetic drugs, brompheniramine (Dimetapp) and terfenadine
(Seldane), act as antihistamines. They interfere with the natural action
16.3.2
Antihistamines
2020-21

452 Chemistry
of histamine by competing
with histamine for binding
sites of receptor where
histamine exerts its effect.
Now the question that
arises is, “Why do above
mentioned antihistamines not
affect the secretion of acid in
stomach?” The reason is that
antiallergic and antacid drugs
work on different receptors.
16.3.3
Neurologically
Active Drugs
(a) Tranquilizers
Tranquilizers and analgesics are neurologically active drugs. These
affect the message transfer mechanism from nerve to receptor.
Tranquilizers are a class of chemical compounds used for the
treatment of stress, and mild or even severe mental diseases. These
relieve anxiety, stress, irritability or excitement by inducing a sense
of well-being. They form an essential component of sleeping pills.
There are various types of tranquilizers. They function by different
mechanisms. For example, noradrenaline is one of the
neurotransmitters that plays a role in mood changes. If the level of
noradrenaline is low for some reason, then the signal-sending activity
becomes low, and the person suffers from
depression. In such situations,
antidepressant drugs are required. These
drugs inhibit the enzymes which catalyse
the degradation of noradrenaline. If the
enzyme is inhibited, this important
neurotransmitter is slowly metabolised
and can activate its receptor for longer
periods of time, thus counteracting the effect
of depression. Iproniazid and phenelzine are
two such drugs.
Some tranquilizers namely, chlordiazepoxide and meprobamate,
are relatively mild tranquilizers suitable for relieving tension. Equanil
is used in controlling depression and hypertension.
2020-21

453 Chemistry in Everyday Life
Derivatives of barbituric acid viz., veronal, amytal, nembutal, luminal
and seconal constitute an important class of tranquilizers. These
derivatives are called barbiturates . Barbiturates are hypnotic, i.e. ,
sleep producing agents. Some other substances used as tranquilizers
are valium and serotonin.
(b) Analgesics
Analgesics reduce or abolish pain without causing impairment of
consciousness, mental confusion, incoordination or paralysis or some
other disturbances of nervous system. These are classified as follows:
(i) Non-narcotic (non-addictive) analgesics
(ii) Narcotic drugs
(i) Non-narcotic (non-addictive) analgesics: Aspirin and
paracetamol belong to the class of non-narcotic analgesics .
Aspirin is the most familiar example. Aspirin inhibits the synthesis
of chemicals known as prostaglandins which stimulate
inflammation in the tissue and cause pain. These drugs are effective
in relieving skeletal pain such as that due to arthritis. These drugs
have many other effects such as reducing fever (antipyretic) and
preventing platelet coagulation. Because of its anti blood clotting
action, aspirin finds use in prevention of heart attacks.
(ii) Narcotic analgesics: Morphine and many of its homologues,
when administered in medicinal doses, relieve pain and produce
sleep. In poisonous doses, these produce stupor, coma, convulsions
and ultimately death. Morphine narcotics are sometimes referred to
as opiates, since they are obtained from the opium poppy.
These analgesics are chiefly used for the relief of postoperative
pain, cardiac pain and pains of terminal cancer, and in child birth.
2020-21

454 Chemistry
Diseases in human beings and animals may be caused by a variety of
microorganisms such as bacteria, virus, fungi and other pathogens.
An antimicrobial tends to destroy/prevent development or inhibit the
pathogenic action of microbes such as bacteria (antibacterial drugs),
fungi (antifungal agents), virus (antiviral agents), or other parasites
(antiparasitic drugs) selectively. Antibiotics, antiseptics and disinfectants
are antimicrobial drugs.
(a) Antibiotics
Antibiotics are used as drugs to treat infections because of their low
toxicity for humans and animals. Initially antibiotics were classified as
chemical substances produced by microorganisms (bacteria, fungi and
molds) that inhibit the growth or even destroy microorganisms. The
development of synthetic methods has helped in synthesising some of
the compounds that were originally discovered as products of
microorganisms. Also, some purely synthetic compounds have
antibacterial activity, and therefore, definition of antibiotic has been
modified. An antibiotic now refers to a substance produced wholly or
partly by chemical synthesis, which in low concentrations inhibits the
growth or destroys microorganisms by intervening in their metabolic
processes.
The search for chemicals that would adversely affect invading bacteria
but not the host began in the nineteenth century. Paul Ehrlich, a
German bacteriologist, conceived this idea. He investigated arsenic
based structures in order to produce less toxic substances for the
treatment of syphilis. He developed the medicine, arsphenamine ,
known as salvarsan . Paul Ehrlich got Nobel prize for Medicine in
1908 for this discovery. It was the first effective treatment discovered
for syphilis. Although salvarsan is toxic to human beings, its effect on
the bacteria, spirochete, which causes syphilis is much greater than
on human beings. At the same time, Ehrlich was working on azodyes
also. He noted that there is similarity in structures of salvarsan and
16.3.4
Antimicrobials
The structures of salvarsan, prontosil azodye and sulphapyridine showing structural
similarity.
2020-21

455 Chemistry in Everyday Life
azodyes. The –As = As– linkage present in arsphenamine resembles
the –N = N – linkage present in azodyes in the sense that arsenic atom
is present in place of nitrogen. He also noted tissues getting coloured
by dyes selectively. Therefore, Ehrlich began to search for the
compounds which resemble in structure to azodyes and selectively
bind to bacteria. In 1932, he succeeded in preparing the first effective
antibacterial agent, prontosil , which resembles in structure to the
compound, salvarsan. Soon it was discovered that in the body prontosil
is converted to a compound called sulphanilamide , which is the real
active compound. Thus the sulpha drugs were discovered. A large
range of sulphonamide analogues was synthesised. One of the most
effective is sulphapyridine.
Despite the success of sulfonamides, the real revolution in
antibacterial therapy began with the discovery of Alexander Fleming
in 1929, of the antibacterial properties of a Penicillium fungus.
Isolation and purification of active compound to accumulate sufficient
material for clinical trials took thirteen years.
Antibiotics have either cidal (killing) effect or a static (inhibitory) effect
on microbes. A few examples of the two types of antibiotics are as follows:
Bactericidal Bacteriostatic
Penicillin Erythromycin
Aminoglycosides Tetracycline
Ofloxacin Chloramphenicol
The range of bacteria or other microorganisms that are affected by a
certain antibiotic is expressed as its spectrum of action. Antibiotics which
kill or inhibit a wide range of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria
are said to be broad spectrum antibiotics . Those effective mainly against
Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria are narrow spectrum
antibiotics . If effective against a single organism or disease, they are
referred to as limited spectrum antibiotics. Penicillin G has a narrow
spectrum. Ampicillin and Amoxycillin are synthetic modifications of
penicillins. These have broad spectrum. It is absolutely essential to test
the patients for sensitivity (allergy) to penicillin before it is administered.
In India, penicillin is manufactured at the Hindustan Antibiotics in Pimpri
and in private sector industry.
Chloramphenicol, isolated in 1947, is a broad spectrum antibiotic.
It is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and hence can
be given orally in case of typhoid, dysentery, acute fever, certain
form of urinary infections, meningitis and pneumonia. Vancomycin
and ofloxacin are the other important broad spectrum antibiotics.
The antibiotic dysidazirine is supposed to be toxic towards certain
strains of cancer cells.
H.W. Florey and
Alexander Fleming
shared the Nobel prize
for Medicine in 1945 for
their independent
contributions to the
development of
penicillin.
2020-21

456 Chemistry
(b) Antiseptics and disinfectants
Antiseptics and disinfectants are also the chemicals which either kill
or prevent the growth of microorganisms.
Antiseptics are applied to the living tissues such as wounds, cuts,
ulcers and diseased skin surfaces. Examples are furacine ,
soframicine, etc. These are not ingested like antibiotics. Commonly
used antiseptic, dettol is a mixture of chloroxylenol and terpineol .
Bithionol (the compound is also called bithional) is added to soaps to
impart antiseptic properties.
Iodine is a powerful antiseptic. Its
2-3 per cent solution in alcohol-
water mixture is known as
tincture of iodine . It is applied
on wounds. Iodoform is also used
as an antiseptic for wounds. Boric
acid in dilute aqueous solution is
weak antiseptic for eyes.
Disinfectants are applied to inanimate objects such as floors,
drainage system, instruments, etc. Same substances can act as an
antiseptic as well as disinfectant by varying the concentration. For
example, 0.2 per cent solution of phenol is an antiseptic while its one
percent solution is disinfectant.
Chlorine in the concentration of 0.2 to 0.4 ppm in aqueous solution
and sulphur dioxide in very low concentrations, are disinfectants.
Antibiotic revolution has provided long and healthy life to people. The life
expectancy has almost doubled. The increased population has caused many
social problems in terms of food resources, environmental issues,
employment, etc. To control these problems, population is required to be
controlled. This has lead to the concept of family planning. Antifertility
drugs are of use in this direction. Birth control pills essentially contain a
mixture of synthetic estrogen and progesterone derivatives. Both of these
compounds are hormones. It is known that progesterone suppresses
ovulation. Synthetic progesterone derivatives are more potent than
progesterone. Norethindrone is an
example of synthetic progesterone
derivative most widely used as
antifertility drug. The estrogen
derivative which is used in combination
with progesterone derivative is
ethynylestradiol (novestrol) .
16.3.5
Antifertility Drugs
Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions
16.1 Sleeping pills are recommended by doctors to the patients suffering from
sleeplessness but it is not advisable to take its doses without consultation
with the doctor. Why ?
16.2 With reference to which classification has the statement, “ranitidine is an
antacid” been given?
2020-21

457 Chemistry in Everyday Life
Chemicals are added to food for (i) their preservation, (ii) enhancing
their appeal, and (iii) adding nutritive value in them. Main categories
of food additives are as follows:
(i) Food colours
(ii) Flavours and sweeteners
(iii) Fat emulsifiers and stabilising agents
(iv) Flour improvers - antistaling agents and bleaches
(v) Antioxidants
(vi) Preservatives
(vii) Nutritional supplements such as minerals, vitamins and amino acids.
Except for chemicals of category (vii), none of the above additives
have nutritive value. These are added either to increase the shelf life of
stored food or for cosmetic purposes. In this Section we will discuss
only sweeteners and food preservatives.
Natural sweeteners, e.g., sucrose add to calorie intake and therefore
many people prefer to use artificial sweeteners. Ortho-sulphobenzimide,
also called saccharin, is the first popular artificial sweetening agent. It
has been used as a sweetening agent ever since it was discovered in
1879. It is about 550 times as sweet as cane sugar. It is excreted from
the body in urine unchanged. It appears to be entirely inert and
harmless when taken. Its use is of great value to diabetic persons and
people who need to control intake of calories. Some other commonly
marketed artificial sweeteners are given in Table 16.1.
16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 Chemicals Chemicals Chemicals Chemicals Chemicals
in Food in Food in Food in Food in Food
16.4.1 Artificial
Sweetening
Agents
Table 16.1: Artificial Sweeteners
Artificial Structural formula Sweetness value in
sweetener comparison to cane sugar
Aspartame 100
Saccharin 550
Sucralose 600
2020-21

458 Chemistry
16.4.2 Food
Preservatives
Alitame 2000
Aspartame is the most successful and widely used artificial
sweetener. It is roughly 100 times as sweet as cane sugar. It is methyl
ester of dipeptide formed from aspartic acid and phenylalanine. Use of
aspartame is limited to cold foods and soft drinks because it is unstable
at cooking temperature.
Alitame is high potency sweetener, although it is more stable than
aspartame, the control of sweetness of food is difficult while using it.
Sucralose is trichloro derivative of sucrose. Its appearance and
taste are like sugar. It is stable at cooking temperature. It does not
provide calories.
Food preservatives prevent spoilage of food due to microbial growth.
The most commonly used preservatives include table salt, sugar,
vegetable oils and sodium benzoate, C 6 H 5 COONa. Sodium benzoate is
used in limited quantities and is metabolised in the body. Salts of
sorbic acid and propanoic acid are also used as preservatives.
These are important and necessary food additives. These help in food
preservation by retarding the action of oxygen on food. These are more
reactive towards oxygen than the food material which they are
protecting. The two most familiar antioxidants are butylated hydroxy
toluene (BHT) and butylated hydroxy anisole (BHA). The addition of
BHA to butter increases its shelf life from months to years.
Sometimes BHT and BHA along with citric acid are added to
produce more effect. Sulphur dioxide and sulphite are useful
antioxidants for wine and beer, sugar syrups and cut, peeled or dried
fruits and vegetables.
Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question
16.3 Why do we require artificial sweetening agents ?
16.4.3 Antioxidants
in Food
In this Section, we will learn about detergents . Two types of detergents
are used as cleansing agents. These are soaps and synthetic detergents.
These improve cleansing properties of water. These help in removal of
fats which bind other materials to the fabric or skin.
16.5.1 Soaps
16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5 Cleansing Cleansing Cleansing Cleansing Cleansing
Agents Agents Agents Agents Agents
2020-21

459 Chemistry in Everyday Life
Soaps are the detergents used since long. Soaps used for cleaning
purpose are sodium or potassium salts of long chain fatty acids, e.g.,
stearic, oleic and palmitic acids. Soaps containing sodium salts are
formed by heating fat ( i.e. , glyceryl ester of fatty acid) with aqueous
sodium hydroxide solution. This reaction is known as saponification .
In this reaction, esters of fatty acids are hydrolysed and the soap
obtained remains in colloidal form. It is precipitated from the solution
by adding sodium chloride. The solution left after removing the soap
contains glycerol, which can be recovered by fractional distillation.
Only sodium and potassium soaps are soluble in water and are used
for cleaning purposes. Generally potassium soaps are soft to the skin
than sodium soaps. These can be prepared by using potassium
hydroxide solution in place of sodium hydroxide.
Types of soaps
Basically all soaps are made by boiling fats or oils with suitable
soluble hydroxide. Variations are made by using different raw materials.
Toilet soaps are prepared by using better grades of fats and oils
and care is taken to remove excess alkali. Colour and perfumes are
added to make these more attractive.
Soaps that float in water are made by beating tiny air bubbles
before their hardening. Transparent soaps are made by dissolving the
soap in ethanol and then evaporating the excess solvent.
In medicated soaps, substances of medicinal value are added. In
some soaps, deodorants are added. Shaving soaps contain glycerol to
prevent rapid drying. A gum called, rosin is added while making them.
It forms sodium rosinate which lathers well. Laundry soaps contain
fillers like sodium rosinate, sodium silicate, borax and sodium carbonate.
Soap chips are made by running a thin sheet of melted soap onto
a cool cylinder and scraping off the soaps in small broken pieces. Soap
granules are dried miniature soap bubbles. Soap powders and scouring
soaps contain some soap, a scouring agent (abrasive) such as powdered
pumice or finely divided sand, and builders like sodium carbonate and
trisodium phosphate. Builders make the soaps act more rapidly. The
cleansing action of soap has been discussed in Unit 5.
Why do soaps not work in hard water?
Hard water contains calcium and magnesium ions. These ions form
insoluble calcium and magnesium soaps respectively when sodium or
potassium soaps are dissolved in hard water.
These insoluble soaps separate as scum in water and are useless
as cleansing agent. In fact these are hinderance to good washing,
because the precipitate adheres onto the fibre of the cloth as gummy
mass. Hair washed with hard water looks dull because of this sticky
precipitate. Dye does not absorb evenly on cloth washed with soap
using hard water, because of this gummy mass.
2020-21

460 Chemistry
Synthetic detergents are cleansing agents which have all the properties
of soaps, but which actually do not contain any soap. These can be
used both in soft and hard water as they give foam even in hard water.
Some of the detergents give foam even in ice cold water.
Synthetic detergents are mainly classified into three categories:
(i) Anionic detergents (ii) Cationic detergents and (iii) Non-ionic
detergents
(i) Anionic Detergents : Anionic detergents are sodium salts of
sulphonated long chain alcohols or hydrocarbons. Alkyl
hydrogensulphates formed by treating long chain alcohols with
concentrated sulphuric acid are neutralised with alkali to form
anionic detergents. Similarly alkyl benzene sulphonates are
obtained by neutralising alkyl benzene sulphonic acids with alkali.
16.5.2 Synthetic
Detergents
CH (CH ) 3 2 11
H SO 2 4
CH (CH ) 3 2 11 
SO H 3
NaOH(aq) 
CH (CH ) 3 2 11 
SO Na 3
+
Dodecylbenzene Dodecylbenzenesulphonic acid Sodium dodecylbenzenesulphonate
CH (CH ) 3 2 15 
N CH 3
CH 3
CH 3
+
Br
Cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide
In anionic detergents, the anionic part of the molecule is involved
in the cleansing action. Sodium salts of alkylbenzenesulphonates
are an important class of anionic detergents.
They are mostly used for household work. Anionic detergents
are also used in toothpastes.
(ii) Cationic Detergents : Cationic detergents are quarternary
ammonium salts of amines with acetates, chlorides or bromides
as anions. Cationic part
possess a long hydrocarbon
chain and a positive charge on
nitrogen atom. Hence, these are
called cationic detergents.
C e t y l t r i m e t h y l a m m o n i u m
bromide is a popular cationic
detergent and is used in hair
conditioners.
Cationic detergents have germicidal properties and are expensive,
therefore, these are of limited use.
(iii) Non-ionic Detergents: Non-ionic detergents do not contain any ion
in their constitution. One such detergent is formed when stearic
acid reacts with polyethyleneglycol.
Liquid dishwashing detergents are non-ionic type. Mechanism of
cleansing action of this type of detergents is the same as that of
soaps. These also remove grease and oil by micelle formation.
2020-21

461 Chemistry in Everyday Life
Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions
16.4 Write the chemical equation for preparing sodium soap from glyceryl
oleate and glyceryl palmitate. Structural formulae of these compounds
are given below.
(i) (C 15 H 31 COO) 3 C 3 H 5 – Glyceryl palmitate
(ii) (C 17 H 32 COO) 3 C 3 H 5 – Glyceryl oleate
16.5 Following type of non-ionic detergents are present in liquid detergents,
emulsifying agents and wetting agents. Label the hydrophilic and
hydrophobic parts in the molecule. Identify the functional group(s)
present in the molecule.
Main problem that appears in the use of detergents is that if their
hydrocarbon chain is highly branched, then bacteria cannot degrade
this easily. Slow degradation of detergents leads to their accumulation.
Effluents containing such detergents reach the rivers, ponds, etc.
These persist in water even after sewage treatment and cause foaming
in rivers, ponds and streams and their water gets polluted.
These days the branching of the hydrocarbon chain is controlled
and kept to the minimum. Unbranched chains can be biodegraded
more easily and hence pollution is prevented.
S u m m a r y S u m m a r y S u m m a r y S u m m a r y S u m m a r y
Chemistry is essentially the study of materials and the development of new
materials for the betterment of humanity. A drug is a chemical agent, which
affects human metabolism and provides cure from ailment. If taken in doses
higher than recommended, these may have poisonous effect. Use of chemicals
for therapeutic effect is called chemotherapy . Drugs usually interact with
biological macromolecules such as carbohydrates, proteins, lipids and nucleic
acids. These are called target molecules . Drugs are designed to interact with
specific targets so that these have the least chance of affecting other targets.
This minimises the side effects and localises the action of the drug. Drug chemistry
centres around arresting microbes/destroying microbes, preventing the body
from various infectious diseases, releasing mental stress, etc. Thus, drugs like
analgesics, antibiotics, antiseptics, disinfectants, antacids and tranquilizers are
used for specific purpose. To check the population explosion, antifertility drugs
have also become prominent in our life.
Food additives such as preservatives , sweetening agents , flavours ,
antioxidants, edible colours and nutritional supplements are added to the
food to make it attractive, palatable and add nutritive value. Preservatives are
added to the food to prevent spoilage due to microbial growth. Artificial sweeteners
are used by those who need to check the calorie intake or are diabetic and want
to avoid taking sucrose.
These days, detergents are much in vogue and get preference over soaps
because they work even in hard water. Synthetic detergents are classified into
2020-21

462 Chemistry
Exercises
16.1 Why do we need to classify drugs in different ways ?
16.2 Explain the term, target molecules or drug targets as used in medicinal
chemistry.
16.3 Name the macromolecules that are chosen as drug targets.
16.4 Why should not medicines be taken without consulting doctors ?
16.5 Define the term chemotherapy.
16.6 Which forces are involved in holding the drugs to the active site of enzymes ?
16.7 While antacids and antiallergic drugs interfere with the function of
histamines, why do these not interfere with the function of each other ?
16.8 Low level of noradrenaline is the cause of depression. What type of drugs
are needed to cure this problem ? Name two drugs.
16.9 What is meant by the term ‘broad spectrum antibiotics’ ? Explain.
16.10 How do antiseptics differ from disinfectants ? Give one example of each.
16.11 Why are cimetidine and ranitidine better antacids than sodium
hydrogencarbonate or magnesium or aluminium hydroxide ?
16.12 Name a substance which can be used as an antiseptic as well as
disinfectant.
16.13 What are the main constituents of dettol ?
16.14 What is tincture of iodine ? What is its use ?
16.15 What are food preservatives ?
16.16 Why is use of aspartame limited to cold foods and drinks ?
16.17 What are artificial sweetening agents ? Give two examples.
16.18 Name the sweetening agent used in the preparation of sweets for a diabetic
patient.
16.19 What problem arises in using alitame as artificial sweetener ?
16.20 How are synthetic detergents better than soaps ?
16.21 Explain the following terms with suitable examples
(i) cationic detergents
(ii) anionic detergents and
(iii) non-ionic detergents.
16.22 What are biodegradable and non-biodegradable detergents ? Give one
example of each.
16.23 Why do soaps not work in hard water ?
16.24 Can you use soaps and synthetic detergents to check the hardness of
water ?
16.25 Explain the cleansing action of soaps.
three main categories, namely: anionic, cationic and non-ionic, and each
category has its specific uses. Detergents with straight chain of hydrocarbons
are preferred over branched chain as the latter are non-biodegradable and
consequently cause environmental pollution .
2020-21

463 Chemistry in Everyday Life
Answers to Some Intext Questions
16.1 Most of the drugs taken in doses higher than recommended may cause
harmful effect and act as poison. Therefore, a doctor should always be
consulted before taking medicine.
16.2 This statement refers to the classification according to pharmacological
effect of the drug because any drug which will be used to counteract the
effect of excess acid in the stomach will be called antacid.
16.5
16.26 If water contains dissolved calcium hydrogencarbonate, out of soaps and
synthetic detergents which one will you use for cleaning clothes ?
16.27 Label the hydrophilic and hydrophobic parts in the following compounds.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
2020-21
