After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
• name alcohols, phenols and
ethers according to the IUPAC
system of nomenclature;
• discuss the reactions involved in
the preparation of alcohols from
alkenes, aldehydes, ketones and
carboxylic acids;
• discuss the reactions involved in
the preparation of phenols from
haloarenes, benzene sulphonic
acids, diazonium salts and
cumene;
• discuss the reactions for
preparation of ethers from
(i) alcohols and (ii) alkyl halides
and sodium alkoxides/aryloxides;
• correlate physical properties of
alcohols, phenols and ethers with
their structures;
• discuss chemical reactions of the
three classes of compounds on
the basis of their functional
groups.
Objectives
Alcohols, phenols and ethers are the basic compounds for the
formation of detergents, antiseptics and fragrances, respectively.
11
Unit Unit Unit Unit Unit
11
Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols, , , , , Phenols Phenols Phenols Phenols Phenols
and and and and and E E E E Ether ther ther ther thers s s s s
Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols, , , , , Phenols Phenols Phenols Phenols Phenols
and and and and and E E E E Ether ther ther ther thers s s s s
You have learnt that substitution of one or more
hydrogen atom(s) from a hydrocarbon by another atom
or a group of atoms result in the formation of an entirely
new compound having altogether different properties
and applications. Alcohols and phenols are formed
when a hydrogen atom in a hydrocarbon, aliphatic and
aromatic respectively, is replaced by –OH group. These
classes of compounds find wide applications in industry
as well as in day-to-day life. For instance, have you
ever noticed that ordinary spirit used for polishing
wooden furniture is chiefly a compound containing
hydroxyl group, ethanol. The sugar we eat, the cotton
used for fabrics, the paper we use for writing, are all
made up of compounds containing –OH groups. Just
think of life without paper; no note-books, books, news-
papers, currency notes, cheques, certificates, etc. The
magazines carrying beautiful photographs and
interesting stories would disappear from our life. It
would have been really a different world.
An alcohol contains one or more hydroxyl (OH)
group(s) directly attached to carbon atom(s), of an
aliphatic system (CH 3 OH) while a phenol contains –OH
group(s) directly attached to carbon atom(s) of an
aromatic system (C 6 H 5 OH).
The substitution of a hydrogen atom in a
hydrocarbon by an alkoxy or aryloxy group
(R–O/Ar–O) yields another class of compounds known
as ‘ethers’, for example, CH 3 OCH 3 (dimethyl ether). You
may also visualise ethers as compounds formed by
2020-21

324 Chemistry
substituting the hydrogen atom of hydroxyl group of an alcohol or
phenol by an alkyl or aryl group.
In this unit, we shall discuss the chemistry of three classes of
compounds, namely — alcohols, phenols and ethers.
Monohydric alcohols may be further classified according to the
hybridisation of the carbon atom to which the hydroxyl group is
attached.
(i) Compounds containing 3 C OH −
sp bond: In this class of alcohols,
the –OH group is attached to an sp
3 
hybridised carbon atom of an
alkyl group. They are further classified as follows:
Primary, secondary and tertiary alcohols: In these three types of
alcohols, the –OH group is attached to primary, secondary and
tertiary carbon atom, respectively as depicted below:
Allylic alcohols: In these alcohols, the —OH group is attached to
a sp
3 
hybridised carbon adjacent to the carbon-carbon double
bond, that is to an allylic carbon. For example
Benzylic alcohols: In these alcohols, the —OH group is attached
to a sp
3
—hybridised carbon atom next to an aromatic ring. For
example.
The classification of compounds makes their study systematic and
hence simpler. Therefore, let us first learn how are alcohols, phenols
and ethers classified?
Alcohols and phenols may be classified as mono–, di–, tri- or
polyhydric compounds depending on whether they contain one, two,
three or many hydroxyl groups respectively in their structures as
given below:
11.1 11.1 11.1 11.1 11.1 Classification Classification Classification Classification Classification
11.1.1 Alcohols—
Mono, Di,
Tri or
Polyhydric
alcohols
Monohydric Dihydric Trihydric
2020-21

325 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Allylic and benzylic alcohols may be primary, secondary or tertiary.
(ii) Compounds containing 2 C OH −
sp bond: These alcohols contain
—OH group bonded to a carbon-carbon double bond, i.e., to a
vinylic carbon or to an aryl carbon. These alcohols are also known
as vinylic alcohols.
Vinylic alcohol: CH 2 = CH – OH
11.1.3 Ethers
CH
3 
C CH OH
2
CH
3
CH
3
(i) H C
2 
CH CH OH
2 (ii)
CH
3 
CH 2 CH OH 2 (iii)
CH
OH
CH 3
(iv)
CH 2
OH
CH CH 3
(v)
CH OH CH C
CH 3
CH 3
(vi)
11.1 Classify the following as primary, secondary and tertiary alcohols:
11.2 Identify allylic alcohols in the above examples.
Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions
11.2 Nomenclature 11.2 Nomenclature 11.2 Nomenclature 11.2 Nomenclature 11.2 Nomenclature (a) Alcohols: The common name of an alcohol is derived from the
common name of the alkyl group and adding the word alcohol to it.
For example, CH 3 OH is methyl alcohol.
11.1.2 Phenols—
Mono, Di
and
trihydric
phenols
Ethers are classified as simple or symmetrical , if the alkyl or aryl
groups attached to the oxygen atom are the same, and mixed or
unsymmetrical , if the two groups are different. Diethyl ether,
C 2 H 5 OC 2 H 5 , is a symmetrical ether whereas C 2 H 5 OCH 3 and C 2 H 5 OC 6 H 5
are unsymmetrical ethers.
Monohydric
2020-21

326 Chemistry
According to IUPAC system (Unit 12, Class XI), the name of an alcohol
is derived from the name of the alkane from which the alcohol is derived,
by substituting ‘e’ of alkane with the suffix ‘ol’. The position of
substituents are indicated by numerals. For this, the longest carbon
chain (parent chain) is numbered starting at the end nearest to the
hydroxyl group. The positions of the –OH group and other substituents
are indicated by using the numbers of carbon atoms to which these are
attached. For naming polyhydric alcohols, the ‘e’ of alkane is retained
and the ending ‘ol’ is added. The number of –OH groups is indicated by
adding the multiplicative prefix, di, tri, etc., before ‘ol’. The positions of
–OH groups are indicated by appropriate locants, e.g., HO–CH 2 –CH 2 –OH
is named as ethane–1, 2-diol. Table 11.1 gives common and IUPAC
names of a few alcohols as examples.
Table 11.1: Common and IUPAC Names of Some Alcohols
CH 3 – OH Methyl alcohol Methanol
CH 3 – CH 2 – CH 2 – OH n -Propyl alcohol Propan-1-ol
Isopropyl alcohol Propan-2-ol
CH 3 – CH 2 – CH 2 – CH 2 – OH n -Butyl alcohol Butan-1-ol
sec -Butyl alcohol Butan-2-ol
Isobutyl alcohol 2-Methylpropan-1-ol
tert -Butyl alcohol 2-Methylpropan-2-ol
HO–H 2 C–CH 2 –OH Ethylene glycol Ethane-1,2-diol
Glycerol Propane -1, 2, 3-triol
Compound Common name IUPAC name
Cyclic alcohols are named using the prefix cyclo and considering
the —OH group attached to C–1.
OH
OH
CH 3
Cyclohexanol 2-Methylcyclopentanol
(b) Phenols: The simplest hydroxy derivative of benzene is phenol.
It is its common name and also an accepted IUPAC name. As structure
of phenol involves a benzene ring, in its substituted compounds the
terms ortho (1,2- disubstituted), meta (1,3-disubstituted) and para
(1,4-disubstituted) are often used in the common names.
2020-21

327 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Common name Phenol o -Cresol m -Cresol p -Cresol
IUPAC name Phenol 2-Methylphenol 3-Methylphenol 4-Methylphenol
Dihydroxy derivatives of benzene are known as 1, 2-, 1, 3- and
1, 4-benzenediol.
OH CH 3
OH
CH 3
OH
CH 3
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
Common name Catechol
Benzene- diol 1,2-
Resorcinol
Benzene- diol 1,3-
Hydroquinone or quinol
Benzene- diol 1,4- IUPAC name
(c) Ethers: Common names of ethers are derived from the names of alkyl/
aryl groups written as separate words in alphabetical order and adding the
word ‘ether’ at the end. For example, CH 3 OC 2 H 5 is ethylmethyl ether.
Table 11.2: Common and IUPAC Names of Some Ethers
Compound Common name IUPAC name
CH 3 OCH 3 Dimethyl ether Methoxymethane
C 2 H 5 OC 2 H 5 Diethyl ether Ethoxyethane
CH 3 OCH 2 CH 2 CH 3 Methyl n-propyl ether 1-Methoxypropane
C 6 H 5 OCH 3 Methyl phenyl ether Methoxybenzene
(Anisole) (Anisole)
C 6 H 5 OCH 2 CH 3 Ethyl phenyl ether Ethoxybenzene
(Phenetole)
C 6 H 5 O(CH 2 ) 6 – CH 3 Heptyl phenyl ether 1-Phenoxyheptane
CH 3 CH O 3 CH
CH 3
Methyl isopropyl ether 2-Methoxypropane
Phenyl isopentyl ether 3- Methylbutoxybenzene
CH 3 – O – CH 2 – CH 2 – OCH 3 — 1,2-Dimethoxyethane
— 2-Ethoxy-
-1,1-dimethylcyclohexane
2020-21

328 Chemistry
If both the alkyl groups are the same, the prefix ‘di’ is added before the alkyl
group. For example, C 2 H 5 OC 2 H 5 is diethyl ether.
According to IUPAC system of nomenclature, ethers are regarded as
hydrocarbon derivatives in which a hydrogen atom is replaced by an
–OR or –OAr group, where R and Ar represent alkyl and aryl groups,
respectively. The larger (R) group is chosen as the parent hydrocarbon.
The names of a few ethers are given as examples in Table 11.2.
(i) 4-Chloro-2,3-dimethylpentan-1-ol (ii) 2-Ethoxypropane
(iii) 2,6-Dimethylphenol (iv) 1-Ethoxy-2-nitrocyclohexane
NO 2
OC H 2 5
Example 11.1 Example 11.1 Example 11.1 Example 11.1 Example 11.1
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
OH
CH 3
H 3 C
(i)
(iii)
(ii) CH
3 
CH O CH 2 CH
3
CH
3
(ii) CH
3 
CH CH OH
2
Cl
CH CH
CH
3 
CH
3
(i)
(iv)
11.3 Name the following compounds according to IUPAC system.
Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question Intext Question
(i) (ii)
(iii) (iv) (v)
In alcohols, the oxygen of the –OH group is attached to carbon by a
sigma ( σ ) bond formed by the overlap of a sp
3 
hybridised orbital of
carbon with a sp
3 
hybridised orbital of oxygen. Fig. 11.1 depicts
structural aspects of methanol, phenol and methoxymethane.
11.3 11.3 11.3 11.3 11.3 Structures of Structures of Structures of Structures of Structures of
Functional Functional Functional Functional Functional
Groups Groups Groups Groups Groups
Fig. 11.1 : Structures of methanol, phenol and methoxymethane
Give IUPAC names of the following compounds:
2020-21

329 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
The bond angle in alcohols is slightly less than the tetrahedral
angle (109°-28 ′ ). It is due to the repulsion between the unshared
electron pairs of oxygen. In phenols, the –OH group is attached to sp
2
hybridised carbon of an aromatic ring. The carbon– oxygen bond
length (136 pm) in phenol is slightly less than that in methanol. This
is due to (i) partial double bond character on account of the conjugation
of unshared electron pair of oxygen with the aromatic ring (Section
11.4.4) and (ii) sp
2 
hybridised state of carbon to which oxygen is
attached.
In ethers, the four electron pairs, i.e., the two bond pairs and two
lone pairs of electrons on oxygen are arranged approximately in a
tetrahedral arrangement. The bond angle is slightly greater than the
tetrahedral angle due to the repulsive interaction between the two
bulky (–R) groups. The C–O bond length (141 pm) is almost the same
as in alcohols.
11.4.1 Preparation of Alcohols
Alcohols are prepared by the following methods:
1. From alkenes
(i) By acid catalysed hydration: Alkenes react with water in the
presence of acid as catalyst to form alcohols. In case of
unsymmetrical alkenes, the addition reaction takes place in
accordance with Markovnikov’s rule (Unit 13, Class XI).
Mechanism
The mechanism of the reaction involves the following three steps:
Step 1: Protonation of alkene to form carbocation by electrophilic
attack of H 3 O
+
.
H 2 O + H
+ 
→ H 3 O
+
Step 2: Nucleophilic attack of water on carbocation.
Step 3: Deprotonation to form an alcohol.
11.4 11.4 11.4 11.4 11.4 Alcohols and Alcohols and Alcohols and Alcohols and Alcohols and
Phenols Phenols Phenols Phenols Phenols
2020-21

330 Chemistry
(ii) By hydroboration–oxidation : Diborane (BH 3 ) 2 reacts with alkenes
to give trialkyl boranes as addition product. This is oxidised to
alcohol by hydrogen peroxide in the presence of aqueous sodium
hydroxide.
The addition of borane to the double bond takes place in such
a manner that the boron atom gets attached to the sp
2 
carbon
carrying greater number of hydrogen atoms. The alcohol so formed
looks as if it has been formed by the addition of water to the
alkene in a way opposite to the Markovnikov’s rule. In this reaction,
alcohol is obtained in excellent yield.
2. From carbonyl compounds
(i) By reduction of aldehydes and ketones : Aldehydes and ketones
are reduced to the corresponding alcohols by addition of
hydrogen in the presence of catalysts (catalytic hydrogenation).
The usual catalyst is a finely divided metal such as platinum,
palladium or nickel. It is also prepared by treating aldehydes
and ketones with sodium borohydride (NaBH 4 ) or lithium
aluminium hydride (LiAlH 4 ). Aldehydes yield primary alcohols
whereas ketones give secondary alcohols.
(ii) By reduction of carboxylic acids and esters : Carboxylic acids
are reduced to primary alcohols in excellent yields by lithium
aluminium hydride, a strong reducing agent.
RCOOH
(i) LiAlH 4
(ii) H O 2
RCH OH 2
However, LiAlH 4 is an expensive reagent, and therefore, used
for preparing special chemicals only. Commercially, acids are
reduced to alcohols by converting them to the esters (Section
11.4.4), followed by their reduction using hydrogen in the
presence of catalyst (catalytic hydrogenation).
R'OH
H
+
Hydroboration -
oxidation was first
reported by H.C.
Brown in 1959. For
his studies on boron
containing organic
compounds, Brown
shared the 1979 Nobel
prize in Chemistry
with G. Wittig.
The numbers in front
of the reagents along
the arrow indicate
that the second
reagent is added only
when the reaction
with first is complete.
2020-21

331 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
3. From Grignard reagents
Alcohols are produced by the reaction of Grignard reagents (Unit 10,
Class XII) with aldehydes and ketones.
The first step of the reaction is the nucleophilic addition of Grignard
reagent to the carbonyl group to form an adduct. Hydrolysis of the
adduct yields an alcohol.
... (i)
...(ii)
The overall reactions using different aldehydes and ketones are as
follows:
You will notice that the reaction produces a primary alcohol with
methanal, a secondary alcohol with other aldehydes and tertiary alcohol
with ketones.
Give the structures and IUPAC names of the products expected from
the following reactions:
(a) Catalytic reduction of butanal.
(b) Hydration of propene in the presence of dilute sulphuric acid.
(c) Reaction of propanone with methylmagnesium bromide followed
by hydrolysis.
Example 11.2 Example 11.2 Example 11.2 Example 11.2 Example 11.2
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
(a) (b)
Phenol, also known as carbolic acid, was first isolated in the early
nineteenth century from coal tar. Nowadays, phenol is commercially
produced synthetically. In the laboratory, phenols are prepared from
benzene derivatives by any of the following methods:
11.4.2 Preparation
of Phenols
The reaction of
Grignard reagents
with methanal
produces a primary
alcohol, with other
aldehydes, secondary
alcohols and with
ketones, tertiary
alcohols.
(c)
2020-21

332 Chemistry
1. From haloarenes
Chlorobenzene is fused with NaOH at 623K and 320 atmospheric
pressure. Phenol is obtained by acidification of sodium phenoxide so
produced (Unit 10, Class XII).
2. From benzenesulphonic acid
Benzene is sulphonated with oleum and benzene sulphonic acid so
formed is converted to sodium phenoxide on heating with molten
sodium hydroxide. Acidification of the sodium salt gives phenol.
3. From diazonium salts
A diazonium salt is formed by treating an aromatic primary amine
with nitrous acid (NaNO 2 + HCl) at 273-278 K. Diazonium salts are
hydrolysed to phenols by warming with water or by treating with
dilute acids (Unit 13, Class XII).
H O
OH NH 2
NaNO 2
+HCl
Aniline
N Cl 2
2 
N + HCl
2
+
Benzene diazonium
chloride
Warm
+ –
4. From cumene
Phenol is manufactured from the hydrocarbon, cumene. Cumene
(isopropylbenzene) is oxidised in the presence of air to cumene
hydroperoxide. It is converted to phenol and acetone by treating it
with dilute acid. Acetone, a by-product of this reaction, is also
obtained in large quantities by this method.
Most of the worldwide
production of phenol is
from cumene.
2020-21

333 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Alcohols and phenols consist of two parts, an alkyl/aryl group and a
hydroxyl group. The properties of alcohols and phenols are chiefly due
to the hydroxyl group. The nature of alkyl and aryl groups simply
modify these properties.
Boiling Points
The boiling points of alcohols and phenols increase with increase in the
number of carbon atoms (increase in van der Waals forces). In alcohols,
the boiling points decrease with increase of branching in carbon chain
(because of decrease in van der Waals forces with decrease in surface
area).
The –OH group in alcohols and phenols is involved in intermolecular
hydrogen bonding as shown below:
It is interesting to note that boiling points of alcohols and phenols
are higher in comparison to other classes of compounds, namely
hydrocarbons, ethers, haloalkanes and haloarenes of comparable
molecular masses. For example, ethanol and propane have comparable
molecular masses but their boiling points differ widely. The boiling
point of methoxymethane is intermediate of the two boiling points.
11.4.3 Physical
Properties
11.4 Show how are the following alcohols prepared by the reaction of a suitable
Grignard reagent on methanal ?
11.5 Write structures of the products of the following reactions:
Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions
(ii)
(iii)
(i)
2020-21

334 Chemistry
The high boiling points of alcohols are mainly due to the presence
of intermolecular hydrogen bonding in them which is lacking in ethers
and hydrocarbons.
Solubility
Solubility of alcohols and phenols in
water is due to their ability to form
hydrogen bonds with water molecules
as shown. The solubility decreases with
increase in size of alkyl/aryl (hydro-
phobic) groups. Several of the lower
molecular mass alcohols are miscible
with water in all proportions.
Arrange the following sets of compounds in order of their increasing
boiling points:
(a) Pentan-1-ol, butan-1-ol, butan-2-ol, ethanol, propan-1-ol, methanol.
(b) Pentan-1-ol, n-butane, pentanal, ethoxyethane.
(a) Methanol, ethanol, propan-1-ol, butan-2-ol, butan-1-ol, pentan-1-ol.
(b) n-Butane, ethoxyethane, pentanal and pentan-1-ol.
Example 11.3 Example 11.3 Example 11.3 Example 11.3 Example 11.3
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
Alcohols are versatile compounds. They react both as nucleophiles and
electrophiles. The bond between O–H is broken when alcohols react as
nucleophiles.
11.4.4 Chemical
Reactions
Alcohols as nucleophiles (i)
(ii) The bond between C–O is broken when they react as
electrophiles. Protonated alcohols react in this manner.
Protonated alcohols as electrophiles
Based on the cleavage of O–H and C–O bonds, the reactions
of alcohols and phenols may be divided into two groups:
2020-21

335 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
(a) Reactions involving cleavage of O–H bond
1. Acidity of alcohols and phenols
(i) Reaction with metals : Alcohols and phenols react with active
metals such as sodium, potassium and aluminium to yield
corresponding alkoxides/phenoxides and hydrogen.
In addition to this, phenols react with aqueous sodium
hydroxide to form sodium phenoxides.
Sodium phenoxide
+ H O 2
OH ONa
+ OH Na
The above reactions show that alcohols and phenols are
acidic in nature. In fact, alcohols and phenols are Brönsted
acids i.e., they can donate a proton to a stronger base (B:).
(ii) Acidity of alcohols: The acidic character of alcohols is due to
the polar nature of O–H bond. An electron-releasing group
(–CH 3 , –C 2 H 5 ) increases electron density on oxygen tending to
decrease the polarity of O-H bond. This decreases the acid
strength. For this reason, the acid strength of alcohols decreases
in the following order:
2020-21

336 Chemistry
Alcohols are, however, weaker acids than water. This can be
illustrated by the reaction of water with an alkoxide.
This reaction shows that water is a better proton donor (i.e.,
stronger acid) than alcohol. Also, in the above reaction, we note
that an alkoxide ion is a better proton acceptor than hydroxide
ion, which suggests that alkoxides are stronger bases (sodium
ethoxide is a stronger base than sodium hydroxide).
Alcohols act as Bronsted bases as well. It is due to the
presence of unshared electron pairs on oxygen, which makes
them proton acceptors.
(iii) Acidity of phenols: The reactions of phenol with metals (e.g.,
sodium, aluminium) and sodium hydroxide indicate its acidic
nature. The hydroxyl group, in phenol is directly attached to
the sp
2 
hybridised carbon of benzene ring which acts as an
electron withdrawing group. Due to this, the charge distribution
in phenol molecule, as depicted in its resonance structures,
causes the oxygen of –OH group to be positive.
The reaction of phenol with aqueous sodium hydroxide
indicates that phenols are stronger acids than alcohols and water.
Let us examine how a compound in which hydroxyl group
attached to an aromatic ring is more acidic than the one in
which hydroxyl group is attached to an alkyl group.
The ionisation of an alcohol and a phenol takes place as follows:
Due to the higher electronegativity of sp
2 
hybridised carbon
of phenol to which –OH is attached, electron density decreases
on oxygen. This increases the polarity of O–H bond and results
in an increase in ionisation of phenols than that of alcohols.
Now let us examine the stabilities of alkoxide and phenoxide
ions. In alkoxide ion, the negative charge is localised on oxygen
while in phenoxide ion, the charge is delocalised.
The delocalisation of negative charge (structures I-V) makes
2020-21

337 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
phenoxide ion more stable and favours the ionisation of phenol.
Although there is also charge delocalisation in phenol, its
resonance structures have charge separation due to which the
phenol molecule is less stable than phenoxide ion.
o -Nitrophenol o –O 2 N–C 6 H 4 –OH 7.2
m -Nitrophenol m –O 2 N–C 6 H 4 –OH 8.3
p -Nitrophenol p -O 2 N–C 6 H 4 –OH 7.1
Phenol C 6 H 5 –OH 10.0
o -Cresol o -CH 3 –C 6 H 4 –OH 10.2
m -Cresol m -CH 3 C 6 H 4 –OH 10.1
p -Cresol p -CH 3 –C 6 H 4 –OH 10.2
Ethanol C 2 H 5 OH 15.9
Table 11.3: p K a Values of some Phenols and Ethanol
Compound Formula p K a
From the above data, you will note that phenol is million times
more acidic than ethanol.
Arrange the following compounds in increasing order of their acid strength:
Propan-1-ol, 2,4,6-trinitrophenol, 3-nitrophenol, 3,5-dinitrophenol,
phenol, 4-methylphenol.
Propan-1-ol, 4-methylphenol, phenol, 3-nitrophenol, 3,5-dinitrophenol,
2,4, 6-trinitrophenol.
Example 11.4 Example 11.4 Example 11.4 Example 11.4 Example 11.4
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
2. Esterification
Alcohols and phenols react with carboxylic acids, acid chlorides and
acid anhydrides to form esters.
In substituted phenols, the presence of electron withdrawing
groups such as nitro group, enhances the acidic strength of
phenol. This effect is more pronounced when such a group is
present at ortho and para positions. It is due to the effective
delocalisation of negative charge in phenoxide ion when
substituent is at ortho or para position. On the other hand,
electron releasing groups, such as alkyl groups, in general, do
not favour the formation of phenoxide ion resulting in decrease
in acid strength. Cresols, for example, are less acidic than phenol.
The greater the p K a
value, the weaker the
acid.
2020-21

338 Chemistry
Pyridine
R/Ar +R ’ l OH COC R/ArOCOR + HCl ’
The reaction with carboxylic acid and acid anhydride is carried
out in the presence of a small amount of concentrated sulphuric
acid. The reaction is reversible, and therefore, water is removed as
soon as it is formed. The reaction with acid chloride is carried out in
the presence of a base (pyridine) so as to neutralise HCl which is
formed during the reaction. It shifts the equilibrium to the right
hand side. The introduction of acetyl (CH 3 CO) group in alcohols or
phenols is known as acetylation. Acetylation of salicylic acid
produces aspirin.
(b) Reactions involving cleavage of carbon – oxygen (C–O) bond in
alcohols
The reactions involving cleavage of C–O bond take place only in
alcohols. Phenols show this type of reaction only with zinc.
1. Reaction with hydrogen halides: Alcohols react with hydrogen
halides to form alkyl halides (Refer Unit 10, Class XII).
ROH + HX → R–X + H 2 O
The difference in reactivity of three classes of alcohols with HCl
distinguishes them from one another ( Lucas test ). Alcohols are soluble
in Lucas reagent (conc. HCl and ZnCl 2 ) while their halides are immiscible
and produce turbidity in solution. In case of tertiary alcohols, turbidity
is produced immediately as they form the halides easily. Primary
alcohols do not produce turbidity at room temperature.
2. Reaction with phosphorus trihalides: Alcohols are converted to
alkyl bromides by reaction with phosphorus tribromide (Refer Unit
10, Class XII).
3. Dehydration: Alcohols undergo dehydration (removal of a molecule
of water) to form alkenes on treating with a protic acid e.g.,
concentrated H 2 SO 4 or H 3 PO 4 , or catalysts such as anhydrous zinc
chloride or alumina (Unit 13, Class XI).
Ethanol undergoes dehydration by heating it with concentrated
H 2 SO 4 at 443 K.
Aspirin possesses
analgesic, anti-
inflammatory and
antipyretic properties.
2020-21

339 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Secondary and tertiary alcohols are dehydrated under milder
conditions. For example
Thus, the relative ease of dehydration of alcohols follows the
following order:
Tertiary Secondary Primary > >
The mechanism of dehydration of ethanol involves the following steps:
Mechanism
Step 1: Formation of protonated alcohol.
Step 2: Formation of carbocation: It is the slowest step and hence, the
rate determining step of the reaction.
Step 3: Formation of ethene by elimination of a proton.
The acid used in step 1 is released in step 3. To drive the equilibrium
to the right, ethene is removed as it is formed.
4. Oxidation: Oxidation of alcohols involves the formation of a carbon-
oxygen double bond with cleavage of an O-H and C-H bonds.
Such a cleavage and formation of bonds occur in oxidation
reactions. These are also known as dehydrogenation reactions as
these involve loss of dihydrogen from an alcohol molecule. Depending
on the oxidising agent used, a primary alcohol is oxidised to an
aldehyde which in turn is oxidised to a carboxylic acid.
Tertiary carbocations
are more stable and
therefore are easier to
form than secondary
and primary
carbocations; tertiary
alcohols are the easiest
to dehydrate.
2020-21

340 Chemistry
Strong oxidising agents such as acidified potassium
permanganate are used for getting carboxylic acids from alcohols
directly. CrO 3 in anhydrous medium is used as the oxidising agent
for the isolation of aldehydes.
3
2
CrO
R H R C OH CHO  →
A better reagent for oxidation of primary alcohols to aldehydes in
good yield is pyridinium chlorochromate (PCC), a complex of
chromium trioxide with pyridine and HCl.
3 2 3
PCC
O CH CH CH H CH CH O CH CH CH − −  − =  → − =
Secondary alcohols are oxidised to ketones by chromic anhyride
(CrO 3 ).
Tertiary alcohols do not undergo oxidation reaction. Under strong
reaction conditions such as strong oxidising agents (KMnO 4 ) and
elevated temperatures, cleavage of various C-C bonds takes place
and a mixture of carboxylic
acids containing lesser number
of carbon atoms is formed.
When the vapours of a
primary or a secondary alcohol
are passed over heated copper
at 573 K, dehydrogenation
takes place and an aldehyde or
a ketone is formed while tertiary
alcohols undergo dehydration.
Biological oxidation of methanol and ethanol in the body produces the corresponding
aldehyde followed by the acid. At times the alcoholics, by mistake, drink ethanol,
mixed with methanol also called denatured alcohol. In the body, methanol is oxidised
first to methanal and then to methanoic acid, which may cause blindness and
death. A methanol poisoned patient is treated by giving intravenous infusions of
diluted ethanol. The enzyme responsible for oxidation of aldehyde (HCHO) to acid
is swamped allowing time for kidneys to excrete methanol.
(c) Reactions of phenols
Following reactions are shown by phenols only.
2020-21

341 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
1. Electrophilic aromatic substitution
In phenols, the reactions that take place on the aromatic ring are
electrophilic substitution reactions (Unit 13, Class XI). The –OH group
attached to the benzene ring activates it towards electrophilic
substitution. Also, it directs the incoming group to ortho and para
positions in the ring as these positions become electron rich due to
the resonance effect caused by –OH group. The resonance structures
are shown under acidity of phenols.
Common electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions taking place
in phenol are as follows:
(i) Nitration: With dilute nitric acid at low temperature (298 K),
phenol yields a mixture of ortho and para nitrophenols.
The ortho and para isomers can be separated by steam
distillation. o -Nitrophenol is steam volatile due to intramolecular
hydrogen bonding while p -nitrophenol is less volatile due to
intermolecular hydrogen bonding which causes the association
of molecules.
With concentrated nitric acid, phenol is converted to
2,4,6-trinitrophenol. The product is commonly known as picric
acid. The yield of the reaction product is poor.
Nowadays picric acid is prepared by treating phenol first
with concentrated sulphuric acid which converts it to
phenol-2,4-disulphonic acid, and then with concentrated nitric
acid to get 2,4,6-trinitrophenol. Can you write the equations of
the reactions involved?
2, 4, 6 - Trinitrophenol
is a strong acid due to
the presence of three
electron withdrawing
–NO 2 groups which
facilitate the release of
hydrogen ion.
2020-21

342 Chemistry
(ii) Halogenation: On treating phenol with bromine, different reaction
products are formed under different experimental conditions.
(a) When the reaction is carried out in solvents of low polarity
such as CHCl 3 or CS 2 and at low temperature,
monobromophenols are formed.
The usual halogenation of benzene takes place in the
presence of a Lewis acid, such as FeBr 3 (Unit 10, Class XII),
which polarises the halogen molecule. In case of phenol, the
polarisation of bromine molecule takes place even in the
absence of Lewis acid. It is due to the highly activating
effect of –OH group attached to the benzene ring.
(b) When phenol is treated with bromine water,
2,4,6-tribromophenol is formed as white precipitate.
Write the structures of the major products expected from the following
reactions:
(a) Mononitration of 3-methylphenol
(b) Dinitration of 3-methylphenol
(c) Mononitration of phenyl methanoate.
The combined influence of –OH and –CH 3 groups determine the
position of the incoming group.
Example 11.5 Example 11.5 Example 11.5 Example 11.5 Example 11.5
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
2. Kolbe’s reaction
Phenoxide ion generated by treating phenol with sodium hydroxide
is even more reactive than phenol towards electrophilic aromatic
substitution. Hence, it undergoes electrophilic substitution with
carbon dioxide, a weak electrophile. Ortho hydroxybenzoic acid is
formed as the main reaction product.
2020-21

343 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
3. Reimer-Tiemann reaction
On treating phenol with chloroform in the presence of sodium
hydroxide, a –CHO group is introduced at ortho position of benzene
ring. This reaction is known as Reimer - Tiemann reaction .
The intermediate substituted benzal chloride is hydrolysed in the
presence of alkali to produce salicylaldehyde.
4. Reaction of phenol with zinc dust
Phenol is converted to benzene on heating with zinc dust.
5. Oxidation
Oxidation of phenol with chromic
acid produces a conjugated diketone
known as benzoquinone. In the
presence of air, phenols are slowly
oxidised to dark coloured mixtures
containing quinones.
11.6 Give structures of the products you would expect when each of the
following alcohol reacts with (a) HCl –ZnCl 2 (b) HBr and (c) SOCl 2 .
(i) Butan-1-ol (ii) 2-Methylbutan-2-ol
11.7 Predict the major product of acid catalysed dehydration of
(i) 1-methylcyclohexanol and (ii) butan-1-ol
11.8 Ortho and para nitrophenols are more acidic than phenol. Draw the
resonance structures of the corresponding phenoxide ions.
11.9 Write the equations involved in the following reactions:
(i) Reimer - Tiemann reaction (ii) Kolbe’s reaction
Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions
2020-21

344 Chemistry
Methanol and ethanol are among the two commercially important
alcohols.
1. Methanol
Methanol, CH 3 OH, also known as ‘wood spirit’, was produced by
destructive distillation of wood. Today, most of the methanol is
produced by catalytic hydrogenation of carbon monoxide at high
pressure and temperature and in the presence of ZnO – Cr 2 O 3
catalyst.
Methanol is a colourless liquid and boils at 337 K. It is highly
poisonous in nature. Ingestion of even small quantities of methanol
can cause blindness and large quantities causes even death. Methanol
is used as a solvent in paints, varnishes and chiefly for making
formaldehyde.
2. Ethanol
Ethanol, C 2 H 5 OH, is obtained commercially by fermentation, the
oldest method is from sugars. The sugar in molasses, sugarcane
or fruits such as grapes is converted to glucose and fructose, (both
of which have the formula C 6 H 12 O 6 ), in the presence of an enzyme,
invertase. Glucose and fructose undergo fermentation in the
presence of another enzyme, zymase, which is found in yeast.
In wine making, grapes are the source of sugars and yeast. As
grapes ripen, the quantity of sugar increases and yeast grows on the
outer skin. When grapes are crushed, sugar and the enzyme come in
contact and fermentation starts. Fermentation takes place in
anaerobic conditions i.e. in absence of air. Carbon dioxide is released
during fermentation.
The action of zymase is inhibited once the percentage of alcohol
formed exceeds 14 percent. If air gets into fermentation mixture, the
oxygen of air oxidises ethanol to ethanoic acid which in turn destroys
the taste of alcoholic drinks.
Ethanol is a colourless liquid with boiling point 351 K. It is used
as a solvent in paint industry and in the preparation of a number of
carbon compounds. The commercial alcohol is made unfit for drinking
by mixing in it some copper sulphate (to give it a colour) and pyridine
(a foul smelling liquid). It is known as denaturation of alcohol.
Nowadays, large quantities of ethanol are obtained by hydration of
ethene (Section 11.4).
11.5 11.5 11.5 11.5 11.5 Some Some Some Some Some
Commercially Commercially Commercially Commercially Commercially
Important Important Important Important Important
Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols Alcohols
Ingestion of ethanol acts
on the central nervous
system. In moderate
amounts, it affects
judgment and lowers
inhibitions. Higher
concentrations cause
nausea and loss of
consciousness. Even at
higher concentrations,
it interferes with
spontaneous respiration
and can be fatal.
2020-21

345 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
1. By dehydration of alcohols
Alcohols undergo dehydration in the presence of protic acids
(H 2 SO 4 , H 3 PO 4 ). The formation of the reaction product, alkene or ether
depends on the reaction conditions. For example, ethanol is
dehydrated to ethene in the presence of sulphuric acid at 443 K.
At 413 K, ethoxyethane is the main product.
The formation of ether is a nucleophilic bimolecular reaction (S N 2)
involving the attack of alcohol molecule on a protonated alcohol, as
indicated below:
11.6 11.6 11.6 11.6 11.6 Ethers Ethers Ethers Ethers Ethers
11.6.1 Preparation
of Ethers
Acidic dehydration of alcohols, to give an alkene is also associated
with substitution reaction to give an ether.
The method is suitable for the preparation of ethers having
primary alkyl groups only. The alkyl group should be unhindered
and the temperature be kept low. Otherwise the reaction favours the
formation of alkene. The reaction follows S N 1 pathway when the alcohol
is secondary or tertiary about which you will learn in higher classes.
However, the dehydration of secondary and tertiary alcohols to give
corresponding ethers is unsuccessful as elimination competes over
substitution and as a consequence, alkenes are easily formed.
Can you explain why is bimolecular dehydration not appropriate
for the preparation of ethyl methyl ether?
2. Williamson synthesis
It is an important laboratory method for the preparation of
symmetrical and unsymmetrical ethers. In this method, an alkyl
halide is allowed to react with sodium alkoxide.
R – X + Na R –O ’ R–O–R + Na X ’
+ –
Ethers containing substituted alkyl groups (secondary or tertiary)
may also be prepared by this method. The reaction involves S N 2 attack
of an alkoxide ion on primary alkyl halide.
Diethyl ether has been
used widely as an
inhalation anaesthetic.
But due to its slow
effect and an
unpleasant recovery
period, it has been
replaced, as an
anaesthetic, by other
compounds.
Alexander William
Williamson (1824–1904)
was born in London of
Scottish parents. In
1849, he became
Professor of Chemistry
at University College,
London.
2020-21

346 Chemistry
O CH –Br 3 Na +
Better results are obtained if the alkyl halide is primary. In case
of secondary and tertiary alkyl halides, elimination competes over
substitution. If a tertiary alkyl halide is used, an alkene is the only
reaction product and no ether is formed. For example, the reaction of
CH 3 ONa with (CH 3 ) 3 C–Br gives exclusively 2-methylpropene.
It is because alkoxides are not only nucleophiles but strong bases
as well. They react with alkyl halides leading to elimination reactions.
The following is not an appropriate reaction for the preparation of
t-butyl ethyl ether.
(i) What would be the major product of this reaction ?
(ii) Write a suitable reaction for the preparation of t-butylethyl ether.
(i) The major product of the given reaction is 2-methylprop-1-ene.
It is because sodium ethoxide is a strong nucleophile as well as
a strong base. Thus elimination reaction predominates over
substitution.
Example 11.6 Example 11.6 Example 11.6 Example 11.6 Example 11.6
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
(ii)
Phenols are also converted to ethers by this method. In this, phenol
is used as the phenoxide moiety.
2020-21

347 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
The C-O bonds in ethers are polar and thus, ethers have a net dipole
moment. The weak polarity of ethers do not appreciably affect their
boiling points which are comparable to those of the alkanes of
comparable molecular masses but are much lower than the boiling
points of alcohols as shown in the following cases:
Formula CH 3 (CH 2 ) 3 CH 3 C 2 H 5 -O-C 2 H 5 CH 3 (CH 2 ) 3 -OH
n-Pentane Ethoxyethane Butan-1-ol
b.p./K 309.1 307.6 390
The large difference in boiling points of alcohols and ethers is due
to the presence of hydrogen bonding in alcohols.
The miscibility of ethers with water resembles those of alcohols of
the same molecular mass. Both ethoxyethane and butan-1-ol are
miscible to almost the same extent i.e., 7.5 and 9 g per 100 mL water,
respectively while pentane is essentially immiscible with water. Can
you explain this observation ? This is due to the fact that just like
alcohols, oxygen of ether can also form hydrogen bonds with water
molecule as shown:
1. Cleavage of C–O bond in ethers
Ethers are the least reactive of the functional groups. The cleavage of
C-O bond in ethers takes place under drastic conditions with excess
of hydrogen halides. The reaction of dialkyl ether gives two alkyl
halide molecules.
Alkyl aryl ethers are cleaved at the alkyl-oxygen bond due to the
more stable aryl-oxygen bond. The reaction yields phenol and alkyl
halide.
Ethers with two different alkyl groups are also cleaved in the same
manner.
The order of reactivity of hydrogen halides is as follows:
HI > HBr > HCl. The cleavage of ethers takes place with concentrated
HI or HBr at high temperature.
11.6.2 Physical
Properties
11.6.3 Chemical
Reactions
2020-21

348 Chemistry
The reaction of an ether with concentrated HI starts with protonation of ether molecule.
Step 1:
The reaction takes place with HBr or HI because these reagents are sufficiently acidic.
Step 2:
Iodide is a good nucleophile. It attacks the least substituted carbon of the oxonium
ion formed in step 1 and displaces an alcohol molecule by S N 2 mechanism.
Thus, in the cleavage of mixed ethers with two different alkyl groups, the alcohol
and alkyl iodide formed, depend on the nature of alkyl groups. When primary or
secondary alkyl groups are present, it is the lower alkyl group that forms alkyl
iodide (S N 2 reaction).
When HI is in excess and the reaction is carried out at high temperature,
ethanol reacts with another molecule of HI and is converted to ethyl iodide.
Step 3:
Mechanism Mechanism Mechanism Mechanism Mechanism
However, when one of the alkyl group is a tertiary group, the halide
formed is a tertiary halide.
CH C CH + HI C H OH +CH C I 3 3 3 3
CH 3
CH 3
CH 3
CH 3
O
It is because in step 2 of the reaction, the departure of leaving group
(HO–CH 3 ) creates a more stable carbocation [(CH 3 ) 3 C
+
], and the reaction
follows S N 1 mechanism.
In case of anisole, methylphenyl
oxonium ion, is
formed by protonation of ether. The
bond between O–CH 3 is weaker
than the bond between O–C 6 H 5
because the carbon of phenyl
group is sp
2 
hybridised and there
is a partial double bond character.
CH 3 C
CH 3
CH 3
O
H
+
CH 3
slow 
CH 3 C
CH 3
CH 3
+ 
+ CH OH
3
fast 
CH 3 C
CH 3
CH 3
CH 3 C
CH 3
CH 3
+ 
+ I
–
I
2020-21

349 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Therefore the attack by I
– 
ion breaks O–CH 3 bond to form CH 3 I. Phenols
do not react further to give halides because the sp
2 
hybridised carbon
of phenol cannot undergo nucleophilic substitution reaction needed
for conversion to the halide.
Give the major products that are formed by heating each of the following
ethers with HI.
Example 11.7 Example 11.7 Example 11.7 Example 11.7 Example 11.7
Solution Solution Solution Solution Solution
(iii)
(i) (ii)
(iii)
(i) (ii)
2. Electrophilic substitution
The alkoxy group (-OR) is ortho , para directing and activates the
aromatic ring towards electrophilic substitution in the same way as
in phenol.
(i) Halogenation : Phenylalkyl ethers undergo usual halogenation
in the benzene ring, e.g. , anisole undergoes bromination with
bromine in ethanoic acid even in the absence of iron (III) bromide
catalyst. It is due to the activation of benzene ring by the methoxy
group. Para isomer is obtained in 90% yield.
2020-21

350 Chemistry
Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions Intext Questions
11.10 Write the reactions of Williamson synthesis of 2-ethoxy-3-methylpentane
starting from ethanol and 3-methylpentan-2-ol.
11.11 Which of the following is an appropriate set of reactants for the
preparation of 1-methoxy-4-nitrobenzene and why?
(i) (ii)
(ii) Friedel-Crafts reaction : Anisole undergoes Friedel-Crafts reaction,
i.e. , the alkyl and acyl groups are introduced at ortho and para
positions by reaction with alkyl halide and acyl halide in the
presence of anhydrous aluminium chloride (a Lewis acid) as catalyst.
(iii) Nitration : Anisole reacts with a mixture of concentrated sulphuric
and nitric acids to yield a mixture of ortho and para nitroanisole.
2020-21

351 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
11.12 Predict the products of the following reactions:
3 2 2 3
CH CH CH O – CH HBr − − − + →
CH C OC H 
HI
3 3 2 5 ( ) −  → 
(iii)
(ii)
(iv)
Alcohols and phenols are classified (i) on the basis of the number of hydroxyl
groups and (ii) according to the hybridisation of the carbon atom, sp
3 
or sp
2 
to
which the –OH group is attached. Ethers are classified on the basis of groups
attached to the oxygen atom.
Alcohols may be prepared (1) by hydration of alkenes (i) in presence of an
acid and (ii) by hydroboration-oxidation reaction (2) from carbonyl compounds by
(i) catalytic reduction and (ii) the action of Grignard reagents. Phenols may be
prepared by (1) substitution of (i) halogen atom in haloarenes and (ii) sulphonic
acid group in aryl sulphonic acids, by –OH group (2) by hydrolysis of diazonium
salts and (3) industrially from cumene.
Alcohols are higher boiling than other classes of compounds, namely
hydrocarbons, ethers and haloalkanes of comparable molecular masses. The
ability of alcohols, phenols and ethers to form intermolecular hydrogen bonding
with water makes them soluble in it.
Alcohols and phenols are acidic in nature. Electron withdrawing groups in
phenol increase its acidic strength and electron releasing groups decrease it.
Alcohols undergo nucleophilic substitution with hydrogen halides to yield
alkyl halides. Dehydration of alcohols gives alkenes. On oxidation, primary alcohols
yield aldehydes with mild oxidising agents and carboxylic acids with strong
oxidising agents while secondary alcohols yield ketones. Tertiary alcohols are
resistant to oxidation.
The presence of –OH group in phenols activates the aromatic ring towards
electrophilic substitution and directs the incoming group to ortho and para
positions due to resonance effect. Reimer-Tiemann reaction of phenol yields
salicylaldehyde. In presence of sodium hydroxide, phenol generates phenoxide
ion which is even more reactive than phenol. Thus, in alkaline medium, phenol
undergoes Kolbe’s reaction .
Ethers may be prepared by (i) dehydration of alcohols and (ii) Williamson
synthesis . The boiling points of ethers resemble those of alkanes while their
solubility is comparable to those of alcohols having same molecular mass. The
C–O bond in ethers can be cleaved by hydrogen halides. In electrophilic
substitution, the alkoxy group activates the aromatic ring and directs the incoming
group to ortho and para positions.
Summary Summary Summary Summary Summary
(i)
2020-21

352 Chemistry
Exercises
11.1 Write IUPAC names of the following compounds:
(i) (ii)
(iii) (iv)
(v) (vi) (vii) (viii)
(ix) (x) C
6
H
5
–O–C
2
H
5
(xi) C
6
H
5
–O–C
7
H
15
(n–) (xii)
11.2 Write structures of the compounds whose IUPAC names are as follows:
(i) 2-Methylbutan-2-ol (ii) 1-Phenylpropan-2-ol
(iii) 3,5-Dimethylhexane –1, 3, 5-triol (iv) 2,3 – Diethylphenol
(v) 1 – Ethoxypropane (vi) 2-Ethoxy-3-methylpentane
(vii) Cyclohexylmethanol (viii) 3-Cyclohexylpentan-3-ol
(ix) Cyclopent-3-en-1-ol (x) 4-Chloro-3-ethylbutan-1-ol.
11.3 (i) Draw the structures of all isomeric alcohols of molecular formula C 5 H 12 O
and give their IUPAC names.
(ii) Classify the isomers of alcohols in question 11.3 (i) as primary, secondary
and tertiary alcohols.
11.4 Explain why propanol has higher boiling point than that of the hydrocarbon,
butane?
11.5 Alcohols are comparatively more soluble in water than hydrocarbons of
comparable molecular masses. Explain this fact.
11.6 What is meant by hydroboration-oxidation reaction? Illustrate it with an example.
11.7 Give the structures and IUPAC names of monohydric phenols of molecular
formula, C 7 H 8 O.
11.8 While separating a mixture of ortho and para nitrophenols by steam
distillation, name the isomer which will be steam volatile. Give reason.
11.9 Give the equations of reactions for the preparation of phenol from cumene.
11.10 Write chemical reaction for the preparation of phenol from chlorobenzene.
11.11 Write the mechanism of hydration of ethene to yield ethanol.
11.12 You are given benzene, conc. H 2 SO 4 and NaOH. Write the equations for the
preparation of phenol using these reagents.
2020-21

353 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
11.13 Show how will you synthesise:
(i) 1-phenylethanol from a suitable alkene.
(ii) cyclohexylmethanol using an alkyl halide by an S N 2 reaction.
(iii) pentan-1-ol using a suitable alkyl halide?
11.14 Give two reactions that show the acidic nature of phenol. Compare acidity
of phenol with that of ethanol.
11.15 Explain why is ortho nitrophenol more acidic than ortho methoxyphenol ?
11.16 Explain how does the –OH group attached to a carbon of benzene ring
activate it towards electrophilic substitution?
11.17 Give equations of the following reactions:
(i) Oxidation of propan-1-ol with alkaline KMnO 4 solution.
(ii) Bromine in CS 2 with phenol.
(iii) Dilute HNO 3 with phenol.
(iv) Treating phenol wih chloroform in presence of aqueous NaOH.
11.18 Explain the following with an example.
(i) Kolbe’s reaction.
(ii) Reimer-Tiemann reaction.
(iii) Williamson ether synthesis.
(iv) Unsymmetrical ether.
11.19 Write the mechanism of acid dehydration of ethanol to yield ethene.
11.20 How are the following conversions carried out?
(i) Propene → Propan-2-ol.
(ii) Benzyl chloride → Benzyl alcohol.
(iii) Ethyl magnesium chloride → Propan-1-ol.
(iv) Methyl magnesium bromide → 2-Methylpropan-2-ol.
11.21 Name the reagents used in the following reactions:
(i) Oxidation of a primary alcohol to carboxylic acid.
(ii) Oxidation of a primary alcohol to aldehyde.
(iii) Bromination of phenol to 2,4,6-tribromophenol.
(iv) Benzyl alcohol to benzoic acid.
(v) Dehydration of propan-2-ol to propene.
(vi) Butan-2-one to butan-2-ol.
11.22 Give reason for the higher boiling point of ethanol in comparison to
methoxymethane.
2020-21

354 Chemistry
11.23 Give IUPAC names of the following ethers:
11.24 Write the names of reagents and equations for the preparation of the following
ethers by Williamson’s synthesis:
(i) 1-Propoxypropane (ii) Ethoxybenzene
(iii) 2-Methoxy-2-methylpropane (iv) 1-Methoxyethane
11.25 Illustrate with examples the limitations of Williamson synthesis for the
preparation of certain types of ethers.
11.26 How is 1-propoxypropane synthesised from propan-1-ol? Write mechanism
of this reaction.
11.27 Preparation of ethers by acid dehydration of secondary or tertiary alcohols
is not a suitable method. Give reason.
11.28 Write the equation of the reaction of hydrogen iodide with:
(i) 1-propoxypropane (ii) methoxybenzene and (iii) benzyl ethyl ether.
11.29 Explain the fact that in aryl alkyl ethers (i) the alkoxy group activates the
benzene ring towards electrophilic substitution and (ii) it directs the
incoming substituents to ortho and para positions in benzene ring.
11.30 Write the mechanism of the reaction of HI with methoxymethane.
11.31 Write equations of the following reactions:
(i) Friedel-Crafts reaction – alkylation of anisole.
(ii) Nitration of anisole.
(iii) Bromination of anisole in ethanoic acid medium.
(iv) Friedel-Craft’s acetylation of anisole.
11.32 Show how would you synthesise the following alcohols from appropriate
alkenes?
CH 3
OH
OH
OH
OH
(i) (ii)
(iii) (iv)
11.33 When 3-methylbutan-2-ol is treated with HBr, the following reaction takes
place:
Give a mechanism for this reaction.
(Hint : The secondary carbocation formed in step II rearranges to a more
stable tertiary carbocation by a hydride ion shift from 3rd carbon atom.
2020-21

355 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Answers to Some Intext Questions
11.1 Primary alcohols (i), (ii), (iii)
Secondary alcohols (iv) and (v)
Tertiary alcohols (vi)
11.2 Allylic alcohols (ii) and (vi)
11.3 (i) 4-Chloro-3-ethyl-2-(1-methylethyl)-butan-1-ol
(ii) 2, 5-Dimethylhexane-1,3-diol
(iii) 3-Bromocyclohexanol
(iv) Hex-1-en-3-ol
(v) 2-Bromo-3-methylbut-2-en-1-ol
11.4
11.5 CH 3 
CH 3 CH (i)
OH
OH
(ii)
CH 2 C OCH 3
O
CH 3 CH OH 2 CH (iii)
CH 3
CH 2
11.7 (i) 1-Methylcyclohexene
(ii) A Mixture of but-1-ene and but-2-ene. But-2-ene is the major product
formed due to rearrangement to give secondary carbocation.
11.10
C H OH 2 5
CH 3 – CH 2 – CH –
CH 3
CH – ONa
CH 3
HBr 
C H Br 2 5
C H Br 2 5 + CH 3 – CH 2 – CH –
CH 3
CH – OC H 2 5
CH 3
2-Ethoxy-3-methylpentane
2020-21

356 Chemistry
11.11 (ii)
11.12 (i) +
3 2 2 3
CH CH CH OH CH Br (ii)
(iii) (iv) ( ) 3 2 5 3
CH C I C H OH − +
2020-21
