CHEMISTRY 406
UNIT 14
ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY
After studying this unit, you will be
able to
• • • • • understand the meaning of
environmental chemistry;
• • • • • define atmospheric pollution, list
reasons for global warming. green
house effect and acid rain;
• • • • • identify causes for ozone layer
depletion and its effects;
• • • • • give reasons for water pollution
and know about international
standards for drinking water;
• • • • • describe causes of soil pollution;
• • • • • suggest and adopt strategies
for control of environmental
pollution;
• • • • • appreciate the importance of green
chemistry in day to day life.
You have already studied about environment in your earlier
classes. Environmental studies deal with the sum of all
social, economical, biological, physical and chemical
interrelations with our surroundings. In this unit the focus
will be on environmental chemistry. Environmental
chemistry deals with the study of the origin, transport,
reactions, effects and fates of chemical species in the
environment. Let us discuss some important aspects of
environmental chemistry.
14.1 ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION
Environmental pollution is the effect of undesirable changes
in our surroundings that have harmful effects on plants,
animals and human beings. A substance, which causes
pollution, is known as pollutant. Pollutants can be solid,
liquid or gaseous substances present in greater
concentration than in natural abundance and are
produced due to human activities or due to natural
happenings. Do you know, an average human being
requires nearly 12-15 times more air than the food. So,
even small amounts of pollutants in the air become
significant compared to similar levels present in the food.
Pollutants can be degradable, like discarded vegetables
which rapidly break down by natural processes. On the
other hand, pollutants which are slowly degradable, remain
in the environment in an unchanged form for many
decades. For example, substances such as dichlorodi-
phenyltrichloroethane (DDT), plastic materials, heavy
metals, many chemicals, nuclear wastes etc., once released
into the environment are difficult to remove. These
The world has achieved brilliance without wisdom, power
without conscience. Ours is a world of nuclear giants and
ethical infants.
2019-20

ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 407
pollutants cannot be degraded by natural
processes and are harmful to living organisms.
In the process of environmental pollution,
pollutants originate from a source and get
transported by air or water or are dumped into
the soil by human beings.
14.2 ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION
The atmosphere that surrounds the earth is
not of the same thickness at all heights. There
are concentric layers of air or regions and each
layer has different density. The lowest region
of atmosphere in which the human beings
along with other organisms live is called
troposphere . It extends up to the height of
~ 10 km from sea level. Above the troposphere,
between 10 and 50 km above sea level lies
stratosphere . Troposphere is a turbulent,
dusty zone containing air, much water vapour
and clouds. This is the region of strong air
movement and cloud formation. The
stratosphere, on the other hand, contains
dinitrogen, dioxygen, ozone and little water
vapour.
Atmospheric pollution is generally studied
as tropospheric and stratospheric pollution.
The presence of ozone in the stratosphere
prevents about 99.5 per cent of the sun’s
harmful ultraviolet (UV) radiations from
reaching the earth’s surface and thereby
protecting humans and other animals from its
effect.
14.2.1 Tropospheric Pollution
Tropospheric pollution occurs due to the
presence of undesirable solid or gaseous
particles in the air. The following are the major
gaseous and particulate pollutants present in
the troposphere:
1. Gaseous air pollutants: These are oxides
of sulphur, nitrogen and carbon, hydrogen
sulphide, hydrocarbons, ozone and other
oxidants.
2. Particulate pollutants: These are dust,
mist, fumes, smoke, smog etc.
1. Gaseous air pollutants
(a) Oxides of Sulphur: Oxides of sulphur
are produced when sulphur containing fossil
fuel is burnt. The most common species,
sulphur dioxide, is a gas that is poisonous to
both animals and plants. It has been reported
that even a low concentration of sulphur
dioxide causes respiratory diseases e.g.,
asthma, bronchitis, emphysema in human
beings. Sulphur dioxide causes irritation to
the eyes, resulting in tears and redness. High
concentration of SO
2 
leads to stiffness of flower
buds which eventually fall off from plants.
Uncatalysed oxidation of sulphur dioxide is
slow. However, the presence of particulate
matter in polluted air catalyses the oxidation
of sulphur dioxide to sulphur trioxide.
2SO
2 
(g) +O
2 
(g) → 2SO
3
(g)
The reaction can also be promoted by
ozone and hydrogen peroxide.
SO
2 
(g) +O
3 
(g) → SO
3
(g) + O
2 
(g)
SO
2
(g) + H
2
O
2
(l) → H
2
SO
4
(aq)
(b) Oxides of Nitrogen: Dinitrogen and
dioxygen are the main constituents of air.
These gases do not react with each other at a
normal temperature. At high altitudes when
lightning strikes, they combine to form oxides
of nitrogen. NO
2 
is oxidised to nitrate ion, 
3
NO
−
which is washed into soil, where it serves as a
fertilizer. In an automobile engine, (at high
temperature) when fossil fuel is burnt,
dinitrogen and dioxygen combine to yield
significant quantities of nitric oxide (NO) and
nitrogen dioxide ( NO
2 
) as given below:
N
2 
(g) + O
2 
(g) 
1483K
 → 2NO(g)
NO reacts instantly with oxygen to give NO
2
2NO (g) + O
2 
(g) → 2NO
2 
(g)
Rate of production of NO
2 
is faster when
nitric oxide reacts with ozone in the
stratosphere.
NO (g) + O
3 
(g) → NO
2 
(g) + O
2 
(g)
The irritant red haze in the traffic and
congested places is due to oxides of nitrogen.
Higher concentrations of NO
2 
damage the
leaves of plants and retard the rate of
photosynthesis. Nitrogen dioxide is a lung
irritant that can lead to an acute respiratory
disease in children. It is toxic to living tissues
also. Nitrogen dioxide is also harmful to
various textile fibres and metals.
2019-20

CHEMISTRY 408
(c) Hydrocarbons: Hydrocarbons are
composed of hydrogen and carbon only and
are formed by incomplete combustion of fuel
used in automobiles. Hydrocarbons are
carcinogenic, i.e., they cause cancer. They
harm plants by causing ageing, breakdown of
tissues and shedding of leaves, flowers and
twigs.
(d) Oxides of Carbon
(i ) Carbon monoxide: Carbon monoxide (CO)
is one of the most serious air pollutants. It is a
colourless and odourless gas, highly
poisonous to living beings because of its ability
to block the delivery of oxygen to the organs
and tissues. It is produced as a result of
incomplete combustion of carbon. Carbon
monoxide is mainly released into the air by
automobile exhaust. Other sources, which
produce CO, involve incomplete combustion
of coal, firewood, petrol, etc. The number of
vehicles has been increasing over the years all
over the world. Many vehicles are poorly
maintained and several have inadequate
pollution control equipments resulting in the
release of greater amount of carbon monoxide
and other polluting gases. Do you know why
carbon monoxide is poisonous? It binds to
haemoglobin to form carboxyhaemoglobin,
which is about 300 times more stable than the
oxygen-haemoglobin complex. In blood, when
the concentration of carboxyhaemoglobin
reaches about 3–4 per cent, the oxygen
carrying capacity of blood is greatly
reduced. This oxygen deficiency, results into
headache, weak eyesight, nervousness and
cardiovascular disorder. This is the reason why
people are advised not to smoke. In pregnant
women who have the habit of smoking the
increased CO level in blood may induce
premature birth, spontaneous abortions and
deformed babies.
(ii) Carbon dioxide: Carbon dioxide (CO
2
) is
released into the atmosphere by respiration,
burning of fossil fuels for energy, and by
decomposition of limestone during the
manufacture of cement. It is also emitted
during volcanic eruptions. Carbon dioxide gas
is confined to troposphere only. Normally it
forms about 0.03 per cent by volume of the
atmosphere. With the increased use of fossil
fuels, a large amount of carbon dioxide gets
released into the atmosphere. Excess of CO
2
in the air is removed by green plants and this
maintains an appropriate level of CO
2 
in the
atmosphere. Green plants require CO
2 
for
photosynthesis and they, in turn, emit oxygen,
thus maintaining the delicate balance. As you
know, deforestation and burning of fossil fuel
increases the CO
2 
level and disturb the balance
in the atmosphere. The increased amount of
CO
2 
in the air is mainly responsible for global
warming.
Global Warming and Greenhouse Effect
About 75 % of the solar energy reaching the
earth is absorbed by the earth’s surface, which
increases its temperature. The rest of the heat
radiates back to the atmosphere. Some of the
heat is trapped by gases such as carbon
dioxide, methane, ozone, chlorofluorocarbon
compounds (CFCs) and water vapour in the
atmosphere. Thus, they add to the heating of
the atmosphere. This causes global warming.
We all know that in cold places flowers,
vegetables and fruits are grown in glass
covered areas called greenhouse. Do you
know that we humans also live in a
greenhouse? Of course, we are not surrounded
by glass but a blanket of air called the
atmosphere, which has kept the temperature
on earth constant for centuries. But it is now
undergoing change, though slowly. Just as
the glass in a greenhouse holds the sun’s
warmth inside, atmosphere traps the sun’s
heat near the earth’s surface and keeps it
warm. This is called natural greenhouse
effect because it maintains the temperature
and makes the earth perfect for life. In a
greenhouse, solar radiations pass through
the transparent glass and heat up the soil
and the plants. The warm soil and plants emit
infrared radiations. Since glass is opaque to
infrared radiations (thermal region), it partly
reflects and partly absorbs these radiations.
This mechanism keeps the energy of the
sun trapped in the greenhouse. Similarly,
carbon dioxide molecules also trap heat as
they are transparent to sunlight but not
to the heat radiation. If the amount of
2019-20

ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 409
carbon dioxide crosses the delicate proportion
of 0.03 per cent, the natural greenhouse
balance may get disturbed. Carbon dioxide is
the major contributor to global warming.
Besides carbon dioxide, other greenhouse
gases are methane, water vapour, nitrous
oxide, CFCs and ozone. Methane is produced
naturally when vegetation is burnt, digested
or rotted in the absence of oxygen. Large
amounts of methane are released in paddy
fields, coal mines, from rotting garbage dumps
and by fossil fuels. Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
are man-made industrial chemicals used in
air conditioning etc. CFCs are also damaging
the ozone layer (Section 14.2.2). Nitrous oxide
occurs naturally in the environment. In recent
years, their quantities have increased
significantly due to the use of chemical
fertilizers and the burning of fossil fuels. If
these trends continue, the average global
temperature will increase to a level which may
lead to melting of polar ice caps and flooding
of low lying areas all over the earth. Increase
in the global temperature increases the
incidence of infectious diseases like dengue,
malaria, yellow fever, sleeping sickness etc.
Acid rain
We are aware that normally rain water has a
pH of 5.6 due to the presence of H
+ 
ions formed
by the reaction of rain water with carbon
Fig. 14.1 Acid deposition
Think it Over
What can we do to reduce the rate of global
warming?
If burning of fossil fuels, cutting down
forests and trees add to greenhouse gases
in the atmosphere, we must find ways to
use these just efficiently and judiciously.
One of the simple things which we can do
to reduce global warming is to minimise the
use of automobiles. Depending upon the
situation, one can use bicycle, public
transport system, or go for carpool. We
should plant more trees to increase the
green cover. Avoid burning of dry leaves,
wood etc. It is illegal to smoke in public
places and work places, because it is
harmful not only for the one who is smoking
but also for others, and therefore, we should
avoid it. Many people do not understand
the greenhouse effect and the global
warming. We can help them by sharing the
information that we have.
2019-20

CHEMISTRY 410
dioxide present in the atmosphere.
H
2
O (l) + CO
2 
(g)  H
2
CO
3 
(aq)
H
2
CO
3 
(aq)  H 
+
(aq) + HCO
3
–
(aq)
When the pH of the rain water drops below
5.6, it is called acid rain.
Acid rain refers to the ways in which acid
from the atmosphere is deposited on the
earth’s surface. Oxides of nitrogen and
sulphur which are acidic in nature can be
blown by wind along with solid particles in the
atmosphere and finally settle down either on
the ground as dry deposition or in water, fog
and snow as wet deposition. (Fig. 14.1)
Acid rain is a byproduct of a variety of
human activities that emit the oxides of
sulphur and nitrogen in the atmosphere. As
mentioned earlier, burning of fossil fuels (which
contain sulphur and nitrogenous matter) such
as coal and oil in power stations and furnaces
or petrol and diesel in motor engines produce
sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides. SO
2 
and
NO
2 
after oxidation and reaction with water
are major contributors to acid rain, because
polluted air usually contains particulate
matter that catalyse the oxidation.
2SO
2 
(g) + O
2 
(g) + 2H
2
O (l) → 2H
2
SO
4 
(aq)
4NO
2 
(g) + O
2 
(g)+ 2H
2
O (l) → 4HNO
3 
(aq)
Ammonium salts are also formed and can
be seen as an atmospheric haze (aerosol of fine
particles). Aerosol particles of oxides or
ammonium salts in rain drops result in wet-
deposition. SO
2 
is also absorbed directly on
both solid and liquid ground surfaces and is
thus deposited as dry-deposition.
Acid rain is harmful for agriculture, trees
and plants as it dissolves and washes away
nutrients needed for their growth. It causes
respiratory ailments in human beings and
animals. When acid rain falls and flows as
ground water to reach rivers, lakes etc. it affects
plants and animal life in aquatic ecosystem. It
corrodes water pipes resulting in the leaching
of heavy metals such as iron, lead and copper
into the drinking water. Acid rain damages
buildings and other structures made of stone
or metal. The Taj Mahal in India has been
affected by acid rain.
Activity 1
You can collect samples of water from
nearby places and record their pH values.
Discuss your results in the class. Let us
discuss how we can help to reduce the
formation of acid rain.
This can be done by reducing the
emission of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen
dioxide in the atmosphere. We should use
less vehicles driven by fossil fuels; use less
sulphur content fossil fuels for power
plants and industries. We should use
natural gas which is a better fuel than coal
or use coal with less sulphur content.
Catalytic converters must be used in cars
to reduce the effect of exhaust fumes on
the atmosphere. The main component of
the converter is a ceramic honeycomb
coated with precious metals — Pd, Pt and
Rh. The exhaust gases containing unburnt
fuel, CO and NO
x
, when pass through the
converter at 573 K, are converted into CO
2
and N
2
. We can also reduce the acidity of
the soil by adding powdered limestone to
neutralise the acidity of the soil. Many
people do not know of acid rain and its
harmful effects. We can make them aware
by passing on this information and save
the Nature.
Taj Mahal and Acid Rain
The air around the city of Agra, where the
Taj Mahal is located, contains fairly high
levels of sulphur and nitrogen oxides. It is
mainly due to a large number of industries
and power plants around the area. Use of
poor quality of coal, kerosene and firewood
as fuel for domestic purposes add up to
this problem. The resulting acid rain
reacts with marble, CaCO
3 
of Taj Mahal
(CaCO
3 
+H
2
SO
4 
→ CaSO 
4 
+ H 
2
O+ CO
2
)
causing damage to this wonderful
monument that has attracted people from
around the world. As a result, the
monument is being slowly disfigured and
the marble is getting discoloured and
lustreless. The Government of India
announced an action plan in early 1995
to prevent the disfiguring of this historical
monument. Mathura refinery has already
taken suitable measures to check the
emission of toxic gases.
2019-20

ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 411
2. Particulate Pollutants
Particulates pollutants are the minute solid
particles or liquid droplets in air. These are
present in vehicle emissions, smoke particles
from fires, dust particles and ash from
industries. Particulates in the atmosphere
may be viable or non-viable. The viable
particulates e.g., bacteria, fungi, moulds,
algae etc., are minute living organisms that are
dispersed in the atmosphere. Human beings
are allergic to some of the fungi found in air.
They can also cause plant diseases.
Non-viable particulates may be classified
according to their nature and size as follows:
(a) Smoke particulates consist of solid or
mixture of solid and liquid particles formed
during combustion of organic matter.
Examples are cigarette smoke, smoke from
burning of fossil fuel, garbage and dry
leaves, oil smoke etc.
(b) Dust is composed of fine solid particles
(over 1 μ m in diameter), produced during
crushing, grinding and attribution of solid
materials. Sand from sand blasting, saw
dust from wood works, pulverized coal,
cement and fly ash from factories, dust
storms etc., are some typical examples of
this type of particulate emission.
(c) Mists are produced by particles of spray
liquids and by condensation of vapours in
air. Examples are sulphuric acid mist and
herbicides and insecticides that miss their
targets and travel through air and form
mists.
(d) Fumes are generally obtained by the
condensation of vapours during
sublimation, distillation, boiling and
several other chemical reactions. Generally,
organic solvents, metals and metallic
oxides form fume particles.
The effect of particulate pollutants are
largely dependent on the particle size. Air-
borne particles such as dust, fumes, mist etc.,
are dangerous for human health. Particulate
pollutants bigger than 5 microns are likely to
lodge in the nasal passage, whereas particles
of about 10 micron enter into lungs easily.
Lead used to be a major air pollutant
emitted by vehicles. Leaded petrol used to be
the primary source of air-borne lead emission
in Indian cities. This problem has now been
overcome by using unleaded petrol in most of
the cities in India. Lead interferes with the
development and maturation of red blood cells.
Smog
The word smog is derived from smoke and fog.
This is the most common example of air
pollution that occurs in many cities
throughout the world. There are two types of
smog:
(a) Classical smog occurs in cool humid
climate. It is a mixture of smoke, fog and
sulphur dioxide. Chemically it is a
reducing mixture and so it is also called
as reducing smog.
(b) Photochemical smog occurs in warm, dry
and sunny climate. The main components
of the photochemical smog result from the
action of sunlight on unsaturated
hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides
produced by automobiles and factories.
Photochemical smog has high
concentration of oxidising agents and is,
therefore, called as oxidising smog.
Formation of photochemical smog
When fossil fuels are burnt, a variety of
pollutants are emitted into the earth’s
This plan aims at clearing the air in
the ‘Taj Trapezium’ – an area that includes
the towns of Agra, Firozabad, Mathura and
Bharatpur. Under this plan more than
2000 polluting industries lying inside the
trapezium would switch over to the use of
natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas
instead of coal or oil. A new natural gas
pipeline would bring more than half a
million cubic metres of natural gas a day
to this area. People living in the city will
also be encouraged to use liquefied
petroleum gas in place of coal, kerosene or
firewood. Vehicles plying on highways in
the vicinity of Taj would be encouraged to
use low sulphur content diesel.
2019-20

CHEMISTRY 412
troposphere. Two of the pollutants that are
emitted are hydrocarbons (unburnt fuels) and
nitric oxide (NO). When these pollutants build
up to sufficiently high levels, a chain reaction
occurs from their interaction with sunlight in
which NO is converted into nitrogen dioxide
(NO
2
). This NO
2 
in turn absorbs energy from
sunlight and breaks up into nitric oxide and
free oxygen atom (Fig. 14.2).
NO
2
(g) NO(g) + O(g) (i)
Oxygen atoms are very reactive and
combine with the O
2 
in air to produce ozone.
O(g) + O
2 
(g)  O
3 
(g) (ii)
The ozone formed in the above reaction (ii)
reacts rapidly with the NO(g) formed in the
reaction (i) to regenerate NO
2
. NO
2 
is a brown
gas and at sufficiently high levels can
contribute to haze.
NO (g) + O
3 
(g) → NO
2 
(g) + O
2 
(g) (iii)
Ozone is a toxic gas and both NO
2 
and O
3
are strong oxidising agents and can react with
the unburnt hydrocarbons in the polluted air
to produce chemicals such as formaldehyde,
acrolein and peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN).
3CH
4 
+ 2O
3 
→ 3CH
2 
= O + 3H
2
O
Formaldehyde
CH
2
=CHCH=O CH
3
COONO
2
Acrolein  
O
Peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN)
Effects of photochemical smog
The common components of photochemical
smog are ozone, nitric oxide, acrolein,
formaldehyde and peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN).
Photochemical smog causes serious health
problems. Both ozone and PAN act as powerful
eye irritants. Ozone and nitric oxide irritate the
nose and throat and their high concentration
causes headache, chest pain, dryness of the
throat, cough and difficulty in breathing.
Photochemical smog leads to cracking of
rubber and extensive damage to plant life. It
also causes corrosion of metals, stones,
building materials, rubber and painted
surfaces.
Fig. 14.2 Photochemical smog occurs where sunlight acts on vehicle pollutants.
2019-20

ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 413
How can photochemical smog be
controlled ?
Many techniques are used to control or reduce
the formation of photochemical smog. If we
control the primary precursors of
photochemical smog, such as NO 
2 
and
hydrocarbons, the secondary precursors such
as ozone and PAN, the photochemical smog
will automatically be reduced. Usually catalytic
converters are used in the automobiles, which
prevent the release of nitrogen oxide and
hydrocarbons to the atmosphere. Certain
plants e.g., Pinus, Juniparus, Quercus, Pyrus
and Vitis can metabolise nitrogen oxide and
therefore, their plantation could help in this
matter.
14.2.2 Stratospheric Pollution
Formation and Breakdown of Ozone
The upper stratosphere consists of
considerable amount of ozone (O
3
), which
protects us from the harmful ultraviolet (UV)
radiations ( λ 255 nm) coming from the sun.
These radiations cause skin cancer
(melanoma) in humans. Therefore, it is
important to maintain the ozone shield.
Ozone in the stratosphere is a product of
UV radiations acting on dioxygen (O 
2
)
molecules. The UV radiations split apart
molecular oxygen into free oxygen (O) atoms.
These oxygen atoms combine with the
molecular oxygen to form ozone.
O
2 
(g) O(g) + O(g)
O(g) + O
2 
(g) O
3 
(g)
Ozone is thermodynamically unstable and
decomposes to molecular oxygen. Thus, a
dynamic equilibrium exists between the
production and decomposition of ozone
molecules. In recent years, there have been
reports of the depletion of this protective ozone
layer because of the presence of certain
chemicals in the stratosphere. The main
reason of ozone layer depletion is believed to
be the release of chlorofluorocarbon
compounds (CFCs), also known as freons.
These compounds are nonreactive, non
flammable, non toxic organic molecules and
therefore used in refrigerators, air conditioners,
in the production of plastic foam and by the
electronic industry for cleaning computer
parts etc. Once CFCs are released in the
atmosphere, they mix with the normal
atmospheric gases and eventually reach the
stratosphere. In stratosphere, they get broken
down by powerful UV radiations, releasing
chlorine free radical.
CF
2
Cl
2 
(g) C
•
l (g) + C
•
F
2
Cl (g) (i)
The chlorine radical then react with
stratospheric ozone to form chlorine monoxide
radicals and molecular oxygen.
C
•
l (g) + O
3 
(g) → ClO
•
(g) + O
2 
(g) (ii)
Reaction of chlorine monoxide radical with
atomic oxygen produces more chlorine
radicals.
Cl O
•
(g) + O (g) → C
•
l (g) + O
2 
(g) (iii)
The chlorine radicals are continuously
regenerated and cause the breakdown of
ozone. Thus, CFCs are transporting agents for
continuously generating chlorine radicals into
the stratosphere and damaging the ozone layer.
The Ozone Hole
In 1980s atmospheric scientists working in
Antarctica reported about depletion of ozone
layer commonly known as ozone hole over the
South Pole. It was found that a unique set of
conditions was responsible for the ozone hole.
In summer season, nitrogen dioxide and
methane react with chlorine monoxide
(reaction iv) and chlorine atoms (reaction v)
forming chlorine sinks, preventing much ozone
depletion, whereas in winter, special type of
clouds called polar stratospheric clouds are
formed over Antarctica. These polar
stratospheric clouds provide surface on which
chlorine nitrate formed (reaction iv) gets
hydrolysed to form hypochlorous acid
(reaction (vi)). It also reacts with hydrogen
chloride produced as per reaction (v) to give
molecular chlorine.
Cl O
•
(g) + NO
2 
(g) → ClONO
2
(g) (iv)
C
•
l (g) + CH
4 
(g) → C
•
H
3
(g) + HCl(g) (v)
ClONO
2
(g) + H
2
O (g) → HOCl (g) + HNO
3 
(g) (vi)
ClONO
2
(g) + HCl (g) → Cl
2 
(g) + HNO
3 
(g) (vii)
2019-20

CHEMISTRY 414
When sunlight returns to the Antarctica in
the spring, the sun’s warmth breaks up the
clouds and HOCl and Cl
2 
are photolysed by
sunlight, as given in reactions (viii) and (ix).
HOCl (g) 
h ν
 → O
•
H (g) + C
•
l(g) (viii)
Cl
2 
(g) 
h ν
 → 2 C
•
l (g) (ix)
The chlorine radicals thus formed, initiate
the chain reaction for ozone depletion as
described earlier.
Effects of Depletion of the Ozone Layer
With the depletion of ozone layer, more UV
radiation filters into troposphere. UV
radiations lead to ageing of skin, cataract,
sunbur n, skin cancer, killing of many
phytoplanktons, damage to fish productivity
etc. It has also been reported that plant
proteins get easily affected by UV radiations
which leads to the harmful mutation of cells.
It also increases evaporation of surface water
through the stomata of the leaves and
decreases the moisture content of the soil.
Increase in UV radiations damage paints and
fibres, causing them to fade faster.
14.3 WATER POLLUTION
Water is essential for life. Without water there
would be no life. We usually take water as
granted for its purity, but we must ensure the
quality of water. Pollution of water originates
from human activities. Through different
paths, pollution reaches surface or ground
water. Easily identified source or place of
pollution is called as point source. e.g.,
municipal and industrial discharge pipes
where pollutants enter the water-source. Non
point sources of pollution are those where a
source of pollution cannot be easily identified,
e.g., agricultural run off (from farm, animals
and crop-lands), acid rain, storm-water
drainage (from streets, parking lots and lawns),
etc. Table 14.1 lists the major water pollutants
and their sources.
14.3.1 Causes of Water Pollution
(i) Pathogens : The most serious water
pollutants are the disease causing agents
called pathogens. Pathogens include bacteria
and other organisms that enter water from
domestic sewage and animal excreta. Human
excreta contain bacteria such as Escherichia
coli and Streptococcus faecalis which cause
gastrointestinal diseases.
(ii) Organic wastes: The other major water
pollutant is organic matter such as
leaves, grass, trash etc. They pollute water as
a consequence of run off. Excessive
phytoplankton growth within water is also a
cause of water pollution. These wastes are
biodegradable.
The large population of bacteria
decomposes organic matter present in water.
They consume oxygen dissolved in water. The
amount of oxygen that water can hold in the
solution is limited. In cold water, dissolved
oxygen (DO) can reach a concentration up to
10 ppm (parts per million), whereas oxygen in
air is about 200,000 ppm. That is why even a
moderate amount of organic matter when
decomposes in water can deplete the water of
its dissolved oxygen. The concentration of
Table 14.1 Major Water Pollutants
Pollutant Source
Micro-organisms Domestic sewage
Organic wastes Domestic sewage, animal excreta and waste, decaying animals
and plants, discharge from food processing factories.
Plant nutrients Chemcial fertilizers
Toxic heavy metals Industries and chemical factories
Sediments Erosion of soil by agriculture and strip mining
Pesticides Chemicals used for killing insects, fungi and weeds
Radioactive substances Mining of uranium containing minerals
Heat Water used for cooling in industries
2019-20

ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 415
dissolved oxygen in water is very important
for aquatic life . If the concentration of dissolved
oxygen of water is below 6 ppm, the growth of
fish gets inhibited. Oxygen reaches water
either through atmosphere or from the process
of photosynthesis carried out by many
aquatic green plants during day light.
However, during night, photosynthesis stops
but the plants continue to respire, resulting
in reduction of dissolved oxygen. The
dissolved oxygen is also used by
microorganisms to oxidise organic matter.
If too much of organic matter is added to
water, all the available oxygen is used up. This
causes oxygen dependent aquatic life to die.
Thus, anaerobic bacteria (which do not require
oxygen) begin to break down the organic waste
and produce chemicals that have a foul smell
and are harmful to human health. Aerobic
(oxygen requiring) bacteria degrade these
organic wastes and keep the water depleted
in dissolved oxygen.
Thus, the amount of oxygen required by
bacteria to break down the organic matter
present in a certain volume of a sample of
water, is called Biochemical Oxygen Demand
(BOD) . The amount of BOD in the water is a
measure of the amount of organic material in
the water, in terms of how much oxygen will
be required to break it down biologically. Clean
water would have BOD value of less than
5 ppm whereas highly polluted water could
have a BOD value of 17 ppm or more.
(iii) Chemical Pollutants: As we know that
water is an excellent solvent, water soluble
inorganic chemicals that include heavy metals
such as cadmium, mercury, nickel etc
constitute an important class of pollutants. All
these metals are dangerous to humans
because our body cannot excrete them. Over
the time, it crosses the tolerance limit. These
metals then can damage kidneys, central
nervous system, liver etc. Acids (like sulphuric
acid) from mine drainage and salts from many
different sources including raw salt used to
melt snow and ice in the colder climates
(sodium and calcium chloride) are water
soluble chemical pollutants.
The organic chemicals are another group
of substances that are found in polluted water.
Petroleum products pollute many sources of
water e.g., major oil spills in oceans. Other
organic substances with serious impacts are
the pesticides that drift down from sprays or
runof f from lands. Various industrial
chemicals like polychlorinated biphenyls,
(PCBs) which are used as cleansing solvent,
detergents and fertilizers add to the list of
water pollutants. PCBs are suspected to be
carcinogenic. Nowadays most of the detergents
available are biodegradable. However, their use
can create other problems. The bacteria
responsible for degrading biodegradable
detergent feed on it and grow rapidly. While
growing, they may use up all the oxygen
dissolved in water. The lack of oxygen kills all
other forms of aquatic life such as fish and
plants. Fertilizers contain phosphates as
additives. The addition of phosphates in water
enhances algae growth. Such profuse growth
of algae, covers the water surface and reduces
the oxygen concentration in water. This leads
to anaerobic conditions, commonly with
accumulation of abnoxious decay and animal
death. Thus, bloom-infested water inhibits the
growth of other living organisms in the
water body. This process in which nutrient
enriched water bodies support a dense plant
population, which kills animal life by depriving
it of oxygen and results in subsequent loss of
biodiversity is known as Eutrophication .
14.3.2 International Standards for
Drinking Water
The International Standards for drinking water
are given below and they must be followed.
Fluoride: For drinking purposes, water
should be tested for fluoride ion concentration.
Its deficiency in drinking water is harmful to
man and causes diseases such as tooth decay
etc. Soluble fluoride is often added to drinking
water to bring its concentration upto 1 ppm
or 1 mg dm
–3
. The F
– 
ions make the enamel on
teeth much harder by converting
hydroxyapatite, [3(Ca
3
(PO
4
)
2
.Ca(OH)
2
], the
enamel on the surface of the teeth, into much
harder fluorapatite, [3(Ca 
3
(PO 
4
) 
2
.CaF 
2
].
2019-20

CHEMISTRY 416
However, F
– 
ion concentration above 2 ppm
causes brown mottling of teeth. At the same
time, excess fluoride (over 10 ppm) causes
harmful effect to bones and teeth, as reported
from some parts of Rajasthan.
Lead: Drinking water gets contaminated with
lead when lead pipes are used for
transportation of water. The prescribed upper
limit concentration of lead in drinking water
is about 50 ppb. Lead can damage kidney,
liver, reproductive system etc.
Sulphate: Excessive sulphate (>500 ppm) in
drinking water causes laxative effect, otherwise
at moderate levels it is harmless.
Nitrate: The maximum limit of nitrate in
drinking water is 50 ppm. Excess nitrate in
drinking water can cause disease such as
methemoglobinemia (‘blue baby’ syndrome).
Other metals: The maximum concentration
of some common metals recommended in
drinking water are given in Table 14.2.
pollution levels. Ensure that appropriate
action is taken. You can write to the press
also. Do not dump waste into a
household or industrial drain which can
enter directly to any water body, such as,
river, pond, stream or lake. Use compost
instead of chemical fertilizers in gardens.
Avoid the use of pesticides like DDT,
malathion etc., at home and try to use
dried neem leaves to help keep insects
away. Add a few crystals of potassium
permanganate (KMnO
4
) or bleaching
powder to the water tank of your house.
14.4 SOIL POLLUTION
India being an agriculture based economy
gives high priority to agriculture, fisheries and
livestock development. The surplus
production is stored by governmental and
non-governmental organisations for the lean
season. The food loss during the storage also
needs special attention. Have you ever seen the
damages caused to the crops, food items by
insects, rodents, weeds and crop diseases etc?
How can we protect them? You are acquainted
with some insecticides and pesticides for
protection of our crops. However, these
insecticides, pesticides and herbicides cause
soil pollution. Hence, there is a need for their
judicious use.
14.4.1 Pesticides
Prior to World War II, many naturally
occurring chemicals such as nicotine (by
planting tobacco plants in the crop field), were
used as pest controlling substance for major
crops in agricultural practices.
During World War II, DDT was found to be
of great use in the control of malaria and other
insect-borne diseases. Therefore, after the war,
DDT was put to use in agriculture to control
the damages caused by insects, rodents, weeds
and various crop diseases. However, due to
adverse effects, its use has been banned in
India.
Pesticides are basically synthetic toxic
chemicals with ecological repercussions. The
repeated use of the same or similar pesticides
give rise to pests that are resistant to that
Metal Maximum concentration
(ppm or mg dm
–3 
)
Fe 0.2
Mn 0.05
Al 0.2
Cu 3.0
Zn 5.0
Cd 0.005
Table 14.2 Maximum Prescribed Concen-
tration of Some Metals in
Drinking Water.
Activity 2
You can visit local water sources and
observe if the river/lake/tank/pond are
unpolluted/slightly polluted/ moderately
polluted or severely polluted by looking
at water or by checking pH of water.
Document the name of the river and the
nearby urban or industrial site from
where the pollution is generated. Inform
about this to Pollution Control Board’s
office set up by Government to measure
2019-20

ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 417
group of pesticides thus making the pesticides
ineffective. Therefore, as insect resistance of
DDT increased, other organic toxins such as
Aldrin and Dieldrin were introduced in the
market by pesticide industry. Most of the
organic toxins are water insoluble and non-
biodegradable. These high persistent toxins
are, therefore, transferred from lower trophic
level to higher trophic level through food chain
(Fig.14.3). Over the time, the concentration of
toxins in higher animals reach a level which
causes serious metabolic and physiological
disorders.
Fig. 14.3 At each trophic level, the pollutant
gets 10 times concentrated.
sodium chlorate (NaClO
3
), sodium arsinite
(Na
3
AsO
3
) and many others. During the first
half of the last century, the shift from
mechanical to chemical weed control had
provided the industry with flourishing
economic market. But one must remember that
these are also not environment friendly.
Most herbicides are toxic to mammals but
are not as persistent as organo-chlorides.
These chemicals decompose in a few months.
Like organo-chlorides, these too become
concentrated in the food web. Some herbicides
cause birth defects. Studies show that corn-
fields sprayed with herbicides are more prone
to insect attack and plant disease than fields
that are weeded manually.
Pesticides and herbicides represent only a
very small portion of widespread chemical
pollution. A large number of other compounds
that are used regularly in chemical and
industrial processes for manufacturing
activities are finally released in the atmosphere
in one or other form.
14.5 INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Industrial solid wastes are also sorted out as
biodegradable and non-degradable wastes.
Biodegradable wastes are generated by cotton
mills, food processing units, paper mills, and
textile factories.
Non-biodegradable wastes are generated
by thermal power plants which produce fly
ash; integrated iron and steel plants which
produce blast furnace slag and steel melting
slag. Industries manufacturing aluminium,
zinc and copper produce mud and tailings.
Fertilizer industries produce gypsum.
Hazardous wastes such as inflammables,
composite explosives or highly reactive
substances are produced by industries
dealing in metals, chemicals, drugs, pharma-
ceuticals, dyes, pesticides, rubber goods etc.
The disposal of non-degradable industrial
solid wastes, if not done by a proper and
suitable method, may cause serious threat to
the environment. New innovations have led to
different uses of waste material. Nowadays,
fly ash and slag from the steel industry are
utilised by the cement industry. Large
In response to high persistence of
chlorinated organic toxins, a new series of less
persistent or more bio-degradable products
called organo-phosphates and carbamates
have been introduced in the market. But these
chemicals are severe nerve toxins and hence
more harmful to humans. As a result, there
are reports of some pesticides related deaths
of agricultural field workers. Insects have
become resistant to these insecticides also. The
insecticide industry is engaged in developing
new groups of insecticides. But one has to
think, is this the only solution to pest menace?
These days, the pesticide industry has
shifted its attention to herbicides such as
2019-20

CHEMISTRY 418
quantities of toxic wastes are usually destroyed
by controlled incineration, whereas small
quantities are burnt along with factory
garbage in open bins. Moreover, solid wastes
if not managed effectively, affect the
components of the environment.
household discards, there are medical,
agricultural, industrial and mining wastes. The
improper disposal of wastes is one of the major
causes of environmental degradation.
Therefore, the management of wastes is of
utmost importance.
You must be aware of the ‘ Swachh Bharat
Abhiyan ’ or ‘Clean India Mission’ launched by
the Government of India.
Do you know about waste recycling?
• • • • • Fuel obtained from plastic waste has
high octane rating. It contains no lead
and is known as “green fuel”.
• • • • • Due to recent developments made in
chemical and textile industries, clothes
will be made from recycled plastic
waste. These will be available soon in
the global textile market.
• • • • • In India, our cities and towns face
endless hours of power cut. We can also
see piles of rotting garbage here and
there. There is a good news that we can
get rid from both these problems
simultaneously. Technology has now
been developed to produce electricity
from the garbage. A pilot plant has been
set up, where after removing ferrous
metals, plastic, glass, paper etc. from
garbage, it is mixed with water. It is then
cultured with bacterial species for
producing methane, commonly known
as biogas. The remaining product is
used as manure and biogas is used to
produce electricity.
14.6 STRATEGIES TO CONTROL
ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION
After studying air, water, soil and industrial
waste pollution in this unit, by now you must
have started feeling the need of controlling
environmental pollution: How can you save
your immediate environment? Think of the
steps/activities, which you would like to
undertake for controlling air, water, soil and
industrial waste pollution in your
neighbourhood. Here, an idea about the
strategies for the management of waste is given.
14.6.1 Waste Management
Solid waste is not the only waste, which you
see in your household garbage box. Besides
Two programmes are being implemented
under the broad umbrella of the Swachh
Bharat Abhiyan . These are Swachh Bharat
Mission–Urban (SBM–U) and Swachh Bharat
Mission Gramin (SBM–G). The SBM–U
primarily aims at making Urban India free
from open defecation and achieving 100%
scientific management of solid waste in the
country. The SBM–G targets to bring about
an improvement in the general quality of life
in rural areas by promoting cleanliness and
hygiene, and eliminating open defecation. It
is accelerating its efforts to achieve the goal of
universal sanitation coverage by 2 October,
2019, which is the birth aniversary of
Mahatma Gandhi. If you have participated in
some event on Swachh Bharat Mission , write
your experiences.
Collection and Disposal
Domestic wastes are collected in small bins,
which are then transferred to community bins
by private or municipal workers. From these
community bins, these are collected and
carried to the disposable site. At the site,
garbage is sorted out and separated into
biodegradable and non-biodegradable
materials. Non-biodegradable materials such
as plastic, glass, metal scraps etc. are sent for
recycling. Biodegradable wastes are deposited
in land fills and are converted into compost.
The waste if not collected in garbage bins,
finds its way into the sewers. Some of it is eaten
by cattle. Non-biodegradable wastes like
2019-20

ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 419
polythene bag, metal scraps, etc. choke the
sewers and cause inconvenience. Polythene
bags, if swallowed by animals can cost their
lives also.
As a normal practice, therefore, all
domestic wastes should be properly collected
and disposed. The poor management causes
health problems leading to epidemics due to
contamination of ground water. It is specially
hazardous for those who are in direct contact
with the waste such as rag pickers and workers
involved in waste disposal, as they are the ones
who handle waste materials mostly without
protective device such as gloves or water proof
boots and gas masks. What can you do for
them?
14.7 GREEN CHEMISTRY
14.7.1 Introduction
It is well known fact that self-sufficiency in food
has been achieved in India since late 20
th
century by using fertilizers and pesticides and
exploring improved methods of farming, good
quality seeds, irrigation etc. But over -
exploitation of soil and excessive use of
fertilizers and pesticides have resulted in the
deterioration of soil, water and air.
The solution of this problem does not lie in
stopping the process of development that has
been set in; but to discover methods, which
would help in the reduction of deterioration of
the environment. Green chemistry is a way of
thinking and is about utilising the existing
knowledge and principles of chemistry and
other sciences to reduce the adverse impact
on environment. Green chemistry is a
production process that would bring about
minimum pollution or deterioration to the
environment. The byproducts generated
during a process, if not used gainfully, add
to the environmental pollution. Such
processes are not only environmental
unfriendly but also cost-ineffective. The
waste generation and its disposal both are
economically unsound. Utilisation of existing
knowledge base for reducing the chemical
Nobel goes to Green Chemists
Yves Chauvin , Institut Français du Pétrole, Rueil-Malmaison France, Robert H. Grubbs
California Institute of Technology (Caltech), Pasadena, CA, USA and Richard R. Schrock
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, USA won the 2005 Nobel Prize
in chemistry for work that reduces hazardous waste in creating new chemicals. The trio won
the award for their development of the metathesis method in organic synthesis –a way to
rearrange groups of atoms within molecules that the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences
likened to a dance in which couples change partners. The metathesis has tremendous
commercial potential in the pharmaceuticals, biotechnology and food stuffs production
industries. It is also used in the development of revolutionary environmentally-friendlier
polymers.
This represents a great step forward for ‘green chemistry’, reducing potentially hazardous
waste through smarter production. Metathesis is an example of how important application of
basic science is for the benefit of man, society and the environment.
Yves Chauvin Robert H. Grubbs Richard R. Schrock
2019-20

CHEMISTRY 420
hazards along with the developmental
activities is the foundation of green
chemistry. Have you perceived the idea of green
chemistry? It is well known that organic
solvents such as benzene, toluene, carbon
tetrachloride etc., are highly toxic. One should
be careful while using them.
As you know, a chemical reaction involves
reactants, attacking reagents and the medium
in which the reaction takes place. Extent of any
reaction depends upon physical parameters
like temperature, pressure and use of catalyst.
In a chemical reaction, if reactants are fully
converted into useful environmental friendly
products by using an environment friendly
medium then there would be no chemical
pollutants introduced in the environment.
During a synthesis, care must be taken to
choose starting materials that can be converted
into end products with yield approximately
upto 100 per cent. This can be achieved by
arriving at optimum conditions of synthesis.
It may be worthwhile to carry out synthetic
reactions in aqueous medium since water has
high specific heat and low volatility. Water is
cost effective, noninflammable and devoid of
any carcinogenic effects.
14.7.2 Green Chemistry in day-to-day Life
(i) Dry Cleaning of Clothes
Tetra chlroroethene (Cl
2
C=CCl
2
) was earlier
used as solvent for dry cleaning. The
compound contaminates the ground water and
is also a suspected carcinogen. The process
using this compound is now being replaced
by a process, where liquefied carbondioxide,
with a suitable detergent is used. Replacement
of halogenated solvent by liquid CO
2 
will result
in less harm to ground water.
These days hydrogen peroxide (H
2
O
2
) is
used for the purpose of bleaching clothes in
the process of laundary, which gives better
results and makes use of lesser amount of
water.
(ii) Bleaching of Paper
Chlorine gas was used earlier for bleaching
paper. These days, hydrogen peroxide (H
2
O
2
)
Think it Over
What is our responsibility as a human
being to protect our environment?
Some concepts, if followed by an individual,
contribute towards a better quality of our
environment and human life. Always set up
a compost tin in your garden or any other
place in your home and use it to produce
manure for your plants to reduce the use
of fertilizers. Use a cloth bag and avoid
asking for plastic carry bags when you buy
groceries, vegetables or any other item. See
that all newspapers, glass, aluminum and
other items in your area are recycled. We
might have to take little trouble to locate
such dealers. We must realize that we do
not have solutions for every problem but
we can concentrate on issues, which we feel
strongly about and can do some thing
about. We should take care to put into
practice whatever we preach. Always
remember environment protection begins
with us.
with suitable catalyst, which promotes the
bleaching action of hydrogen peroxide, is used.
(iii) Synthesis of Chemicals
Ethanal (CH 
3
CHO) is now commercially
prepared by one step oxidation of ethene in
the presence of ionic catalyst in aqueous
medium with a yield of 90%.
( )( )
( )
Catalyst
2 2 2 Pd(II)/ Cu II in water
3
CH CH O
CH CHO 90%
= +  →
(iv) ‘Green Solution’ to Clean Turbid Water
Powder of kernel of tamarind seeds has been
found to be an effective material to make
municipal and industrial waste water clean.
It is non-toxic, biodegradable and cost-
effective material. This powder is usually
discarded as agricultural waste. The present
practice is to use alum to treat such water. It
has been found that alum increases toxic ions
in treated water and can cause diseases.
Green chemistry, in a nutshell, is a cost
effective approach which involves reduction in
material, energy consumption and waste
generation.
2019-20

ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 421
SUMMARY
Environmental chemistry plays a major role in environment. Chemical species present
in the environment are either naturally occurring or generated by human activities.
Environmental pollution is the effect of undesirable changes in the surrounding that
have harmful effects on plants, animals and human beings. Pollutants exist in all the
three states of matter. We have discussed only those pollutants, which are due to human
activities, and can be controlled. Atmospheric pollution is generally studied as
tropospheric and stratospheric pollution . Troposphere is the lowest region of the
atmosphere (~10 km) in which man along with other organisms including plants exist.
Whereas stratosphere extends above troposphere up to 50 km above sea level. Ozone
layer is one of the important constituents of stratosphere. Tropospheric pollution is
basically due to various oxides of sulphur, nitrogen, carbon, halogens and also due to
particulate pollutants. The gaseous pollutants come down to the earth in the form of
acid rain . 75% of the solar energy reaching earth is absorbed by the earth surface and
rest is radiated back to the atmosphere. These gases mentioned above trap the heat
which result into global warming . It is important to realise that these very gases are
also responsible for the life on the earth as they trap the requisite amount of solar
energy for the sustainance of life. The increase in the greenhouse gases is raising the
temperature of the earth’s atmosphere which, if not checked, may eventually result in
melting of polar ice caps and consequently may submerge the costal land mass. Many
human activities are producing chemicals, which are responsible for the depletion of
ozone layer in the stratosphere, leading to the formation of ozone hole . Through the
ozone hole, ultraviolet radiations can penetrate into the earth’s atmosphere causing
mutation of genes. Water is the elixir of life but the same water, if polluted by pathogens,
organic wastes, toxic heavy metals, pesticides etc., will turn into poison. Therefore, one
should take care to follow international standards to maintain purity levels of drinking
water. Industrial wastes and excessive use of pesticides, result into pollution of land
mass and water bodies. Judicious use of chemicals required for agricultural practices
can lead to sustainable development. Strategies for controlling environmental
pollution can be: (i) waste management i.e., reduction of the waste and proper disposal,
also recycling of materials and energy, (ii) adopting methods in day-to-day life, which
results in the reduction of environmental pollution. The second method is a new branch
of chemistry, which is in its infancy known as green chemistry . It utilizes the existing
knowledge and practices so as to bring about reduction in the production of pollutants.
EXERCISES
14.1 Define environmental chemistry.
14.2 Explain tropospheric pollution in 100 words.
14.3 Carbon monoxide gas is more dangerous than carbon dioxide gas. Why?
14.4 List gases which are responsible for greenhouse effect.
14.5 Statues and monuments in India are affected by acid rain. How?
14.6 What is smog? How is classical smog different from photochemical smogs?
2019-20

CHEMISTRY 422
14.7 Write down the reactions involved during the formation of photochemical smog.
14.8 What are the harmful effects of photochemical smog and how can they be
controlled?
14.9 What are the reactions involved for ozone layer depletion in the stratosphere?
14.10 What do you mean by ozone hole? What are its consequences?
14.11 What are the major causes of water pollution? Explain.
14.12 Have you ever observed any water pollution in your area? What measures would
you suggest to control it?
14.13 What do you mean by Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)?
14.14 Do you observe any soil pollution in your neighbourhood? What efforts will you
make for controlling the soil pollution?
14.15 What are pesticides and herbicides? Explain giving examples.
14.16 What do you mean by green chemistry? How will it help decrease environmental
pollution?
14.17 What would have happened if the greenhouse gases were totally missing in the
earth’s atmosphere? Discuss.
14.18 A large number of fish are suddenly found floating dead on a lake. There is no
evidence of toxic dumping but you find an abundance of phytoplankton. Suggest
a reason for the fish kill.
14.19 How can domestic waste be used as manure?
14.20 For your agricultural field or garden you have developed a compost producing
pit. Discuss the process in the light of bad odour, flies and recycling of wastes
for a good produce.
2019-20
